 Human-LLM Collaborative Inductive Coding for Conceptualizing K-12 Educator AI Use

Alex Liua*, Min Suna, Lief Esbenshadea, Michael Xiaoa, Victor Tiana, Zachary Zhangb, Kevin
Heb

Affiliations
a College of Education, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States

b Colleague AI


Corresponding author
Alex Liu, University of Washington, College of Education, Seattle, WA 98195, United States.
Email: alexliux@uw.edu

Abstract

       Qualitative researchers increasingly encounter interaction corpora whose scale exceeds

what manual coding alone can address, and large language models (LLMs) are frequently

proposed as analytic assistants. The open questions are not whether LLMs can participate in

qualitative analysis but to what extent, in what phases, and under what safeguards. This article

provides a detailed procedural account of a multi-phase human-LLM collaborative pipeline that

adapted open, axial, and selective coding to develop a hierarchical codebook from 45,000

messages exchanged between K-12 educators and a generative AI platform. Across three phases,

LLMs generated candidate labels and structured annotations at scale, while human researchers

retained conceptual authority over category definitions, merging decisions, and interpretive

frameworks. The resulting instrument was then tested through systematic human coding, in

which three trained coders with educational domain expertise applied the codebook to an

independent sample of 2,560 messages, established reliability through iterative calibration using

set-valued agreement measures appropriate for multi-label annotation, and extended the

instrument with five codes that the LLM-assisted phases had not surfaced. The final codebook

comprises 72 items within 19 categories and six domains. We reflect on the methodological
decisions the pipeline required, including the choice of a conversational unit of analysis, the

treatment of the LLM as a labeling instrument rather than an interpretive agent, the measurement

of intercoder agreement under multi-label coding, and the conditions under which human domain

expertise remained decisive. The account is offered as an auditable template for qualitative

researchers considering LLM assistance in codebook development while preserving human

interpretive authority.

Keywords: qualitative coding; large language models; codebook development; human-AI

collaboration; inductive analysis; intercoder reliability; educator-AI interaction

                                           Introduction

       Qualitative methodology has long balanced two commitments that sit in tension, depth of

interpretation and breadth of evidence. Interaction log data has intensified this tension. Digital

platforms now record authentic professional and personal activity at a volume that invites

qualitative questions while overwhelming qualitative capacity. The corpus examined in this

study is a case in point. An AI-powered platform built for education accumulated conversations

from more than 15,000 active K-12 educators, producing a record of authentic professional

practice that no research team could read in full, let alone code line by line. Existing evidence on

how educators use generative AI rests largely on self-reported surveys or small interview

samples (Cheah et al., 2025; Esbenshade et al., 2025; Zaimoğlu & Dağtaş, 2025), in part because

the interaction data that would support stronger claims resist conventional analysis at scale.

       Large language models have been proposed as one response to this impasse. A growing

body of work reports that LLMs can support theme discovery, deductive code application, and

thematic analysis across qualitative corpora (Chew et al., 2023; De Paoli, 2024; Gao et al., 2025;

Shin, 2025; Tai et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2025). The proposal remains contested. Some
researchers warn that delegating analysis to a model threatens the interpretive foundations of

qualitative inquiry (Friedman et al., 2024) or can introduce systematic bias into the resulting

claims (Ashwin et al., 2025), and interview evidence suggests that qualitative researchers

themselves hold divided and often ambivalent views about where model assistance belongs

(Schroeder et al., 2025). The literature also remains dominated by demonstrations on small or

benchmark datasets, concentrated on whether model output matches human output on a fixed

coding task. Far less attention has been given to the fuller methodological problem that

practicing qualitative researchers actually face, which is how to move from an unlabeled corpus

to a validated, hierarchical coding instrument while preserving the interpretive authority that

gives qualitative work its warrant. Codebook development is precisely the phase of qualitative

research in which conceptualization, judgment, and familiarity with the data matter most, and it

is therefore the phase in which claims about LLM assistance require the most careful

specification.

       We take the position that the productive question is not whether LLMs can substitute for

human coders but to what extent, and in what areas, LLM assistance can be incorporated into

established inductive procedures without weakening them. Answering that question requires a

documented case in which the division of labor between human and model is explicit at every

phase, in which the resulting instrument is subjected to independent human application, and in

which the points of human intervention are reported rather than smoothed over. This article

provides such a case. Two methodological questions guided the work.

RQ1. How can established inductive coding procedures, specifically open, axial, and selective

coding, be adapted into a human-LLM collaborative pipeline for developing a hierarchical

codebook from a large corpus of educator-AI interaction data?
RQ2. To what extent, and in what areas, does the resulting instrument hold up when applied

independently by trained human coders, and what does systematic human coding contribute that

the LLM-assisted phases do not?

       The empirical setting is a corpus of 45,000 educator and AI messages drawn from the

platform described above. Through the three-phase pipeline reported here, we developed a

hierarchical codebook capturing the breadth of educator AI use across six professional domains,

then validated and extended the instrument through human coding of an independent sample of

2,560 messages. The substantive patterns of educator AI use documented with this instrument

are briefly reported. The present article concentrates on the method, because we found that the

methodological decisions the pipeline required, concerning units of analysis, prompt design,

label consolidation, agreement measurement, and the boundaries of model assistance, are the

decisions other research teams will face and are rarely reported in enough detail to be reused.

       The remainder of the article proceeds as follows. We first situate the work within the

literatures on codebook development and LLM-assisted qualitative analysis. We then describe

the data source and the three LLM-assisted coding phases, followed by the human coding phase

through which the instrument was validated and extended. We close by discussing the

methodological lessons of the pipeline, the conditions under which human expertise remained

decisive, and the limitations of the approach.

                                           Background

Inductive Coding and Codebook Development

       The pipeline reported here is grounded in the family of inductive procedures associated

with grounded theory and its descendants. Open coding surfaces initial concepts through close

reading and labeling of data segments, axial coding relates and consolidates those concepts into
categories through attention to conditions, context, and consequences, and selective coding

integrates categories into a coherent structure (Charmaz, 2006; Corbin & Strauss, 1990, 2014).

When the analytic goal is a reusable instrument rather than a theory, these procedures culminate

in a codebook, a structured set of code definitions with inclusion and exclusion criteria that

supports consistent application by multiple coders (Saldaña, 2021). Codebook quality is

conventionally evidenced through intercoder agreement, yet standard chance-corrected

coefficients presuppose single-label judgments and penalize partial overlap between coders’ code

sets as though it were full disagreement, a poor fit for multi-label coding of compound

professional activity (Passonneau, 2006). These commitments, phased inductive development,

explicit code definitions, and agreement evidence suited to the coding task, define the

methodological standard against which any LLM-assisted variant should be judged.

LLM Assistance in Qualitative Analysis

       The question of whether computational methods can share in qualitative coding predates

generative models. Nelson et al. (2021) compared hand coding with three families of computer-

assisted text analysis and concluded that algorithmic methods could augment but not replace the

interpretive work of human coders. Than et al. (2025) revisited that comparison for generative

LLMs and reached a parallel judgment, finding that generative models change the economics of

coding while leaving the locus of interpretation with the researcher. Within this lineage, recent

studies have explored several points of entry into the analytic workflow. De Paoli (2024)

performed an inductive thematic analysis of semi-structured interviews with a language model

and characterized both the plausibility of the generated themes and the limits of the approach,

including sensitivity to segmentation choices imposed by token constraints. Chew et al. (2023)

developed LLM-assisted content analysis for deductive coding, and Dunivin (2024) reported that
chain-of-thought prompting can match human performance on some hermeneutic coding tasks

while falling short on others. Wang et al. (2025) piloted LLM-assisted thematic analysis of

online social network data, Shin (2025) examined ChatGPT-assisted co-coding of classroom

dialogue from the perspective of a single researcher, and Gao et al. (2025) built tooling that

structures the model’s analytic steps into a controllable reasoning chain. In education research

specifically, Barany et al. (2024) explored LLM support for qualitative codebook development,

and Liu and Sun (2025) examined the validity of LLM-assisted textual analysis of policy

stakeholder interviews against human coding.

       Methodological work has also begun to formalize how LLM assistance should be

structured and judged. Tai et al. (2024) proposed treating repeated LLM coding runs as

independent coders and positioned the model as a complement to, rather than a replacement for,

human reliability procedures. Misra et al. (2026) compared traditional and researcher-interpreted

LLM approaches to the same corpus, and Xu (2026) examined the practices, ethics, and

reflexivity of thematic analysis conducted with generative AI. Alongside these constructive

accounts sits a body of sustained caution. Friedman et al. (2024) argued that AI assistance risks

hollowing out the researcher’s engagement with data, Ashwin et al. (2025) demonstrated that

LLM-based analysis can introduce systematic bias into downstream claims, Kristensen-

McLachlan et al. (2025) found that model annotation reliability is uneven across tasks, and Matta

et al. (2026) proposed procedural safeguards for protecting qualitative rigor. Read together, these

literatures converge on two observations relevant here. Models are most dependable when the

task is bounded, such as proposing candidate labels or applying a fixed scheme, and least

dependable when the task requires sustained interpretive judgment across a corpus. In addition,
design decisions that precede any model call, including how the data are segmented and what the

prompt asks for, substantially shape what the model can contribute.

       Three gaps in this literature motivated the present account. Most published

demonstrations operate on corpora small enough that full human analysis remains feasible,

which leaves untested the setting where LLM assistance is most consequential. Most address a

single analytic phase, whereas codebook development runs from unstructured exploration

through structured consolidation, and the appropriate division of labor plausibly differs by phase.

Finally, few studies subject the LLM-assisted product to independent application by trained

human coders on new data, which is the test that matters if the product is meant to function as an

instrument. The pipeline described below was designed with these gaps in view.

                                             Method

       To investigate how K-12 educators use generative AI for instructional and professional

purposes, we developed a multi-phase inductive coding pipeline that integrates established

qualitative coding techniques with selective use of LLMs. The primary methodological output is

a hierarchical codebook that captures the breadth of educator AI use. In keeping with the

reflexive commitments of qualitative research, we report not only the procedures but the points

at which human judgment intervened and the rationale for each design decision.

Data Source

       This study draws on educator-AI interactions collected from [redaction], an open-

registration generative AI platform designed to assist educators with instructional planning,

content development, assessment, differentiation, and professional communication. At the time

of data collection, the platform supported over 15,000 active users, including K-12 teachers,
school administrators, paraprofessionals, and instructional specialists. All usage was voluntary

and initiated by educators as part of their authentic professional work.

       The platform allows educators to submit free-form natural language prompts and receive

AI-generated responses, including instructional materials, pedagogical strategies, and

communication artifacts. Prompts span a wide range of grade levels (K-12 and educator

preparation programs), subject areas (literacy, STEM, social studies, arts, career and technical

education), and instructional contexts (multilingual learners, varied pacing needs, diverse

classroom configurations). Prompt types range from brief single-turn requests to complex multi-

turn exchanges involving iterative revision, format adaptation, and pedagogical elaboration. This

dialogic structure preserves the evolving nature of instructional decision-making, as educators

refine or redirect AI outputs to better align with student needs, lesson goals, or contextual

constraints. Each message was accompanied by metadata (conversation ID, timestamp, platform

feature of origin, and anonymized user ID), enabling both message-level and conversation-level

analysis.

       The corpus analyzed across the phases reported below totals 45,000 educator and AI

messages. This figure comprises the 21,147 conversation trios used across the open, axial, and

selective coding phases, together with the 2,560 messages in the human-coded validation sample.

Trios were drawn as overlapping three-message windows within each conversation, where the

follow-up message that closes one trio serves as the opening request of the next, so consecutive

trios within a conversation share messages rather than each contributing three unique messages

to the total. The inductive samples were drawn from the full platform corpus available at the time

of each coding phase. The validation sample was drawn as a stratified random sample by month

across the June 2025 to June 2026 window, and the two samples are independent at the message
and conversation level, since no message or conversation appearing in the validation sample also

appears among the inductive coding samples. This independence supports using the validation

sample to test codebook coverage and reliability, and it additionally allows an assessment of

coding stability over the full year the validation sample spans.

       Ethical considerations. All data were collected under the platform’s terms of use, which

explicitly stated that de-identified data could be used for research purposes. Personally

identifiable information was removed prior to analysis. The study protocol was reviewed and

approved under educational research guidelines by the Institutional Review Board at [Institution

redacted for peer review]. All analysis using commercial LLMs occurred through enterprise API

accounts with contractual terms confirming that submitted data would not be used for model

training. The human subjects of this study are the platform’s educator users. The data analyzed

consist of educators’ messages and the AI’s responses to them. Some educator messages include

excerpts of student writing that a teacher chose to paste into their own request, for example when

asking for feedback on a piece of student work. This content is analyzed as part of the educator’s

submitted message rather than as separately collected student data, consistent with the IRB

determination that the study concerns educator platform use rather than student participants.

Overview of the Inductive Coding Pipeline

       Codebook development followed a three-phase inductive process grounded in established

qualitative methodology (Charmaz, 2006; Corbin & Strauss, 2014). Open coding served initial

theme discovery, axial coding served category refinement and relationship mapping, and

selective coding served final consolidation. At each phase, human researchers retained

conceptual authority over category definitions, merging decisions, and interpretive frameworks,

while LLMs were employed to support theme generation at scale and structured label extraction
across large numbers of messages. Figure 1 summarizes the full pipeline, from data sampling

through the three coding phases to human validation.




Figure 1. Workflow of the human-LLM collaborative inductive coding pipeline. Blue boxes

denote LLM-assisted phases, the orange box denotes human coding and validation, and green

boxes denote outputs. The dashed lane indicates that human researchers retained conceptual

authority over category definitions, merging decisions, and interpretive frameworks throughout

the LLM-assisted phases.

Open Coding for Inductive Theme Discovery
       The first stage of analysis involved open coding to inductively explore the education-

related themes embedded in educator-AI interactions. Drawing on established qualitative coding

practices (Charmaz, 2006; Corbin & Strauss, 1990), this phase aimed to surface recurring

patterns and instructional constructs that would inform the development of a hierarchical

codebook.

       A central methodological consideration in qualitative analysis is defining the unit of

analysis, the segment of data that is interpreted, labeled, and compared. There is no single best

approach. Wang et al. (2025) and Shin (2025) provided entire documents to LLMs to preserve

context, Gao et al. (2025) pre-clustered raw qualitative text based on semantic similarity, and De

Paoli (2024) segmented documents into smaller chunks due to token limitations. In our case,

single educator-AI conversations could reach considerable length, sometimes exceeding 500

messages. To balance contextual richness with token constraints, we began with triadic units,

each consisting of an educator prompt (T1), the AI response (A1), and the educator’s follow-up

(T2), if present. These trios were treated as self-contained instructional interactions, enabling us

to surface dialogic patterns while preserving coherence and instructional intent.

       We employed claude-3-sonnet-20240229 (Claude 3 Sonnet) for this phase. To assess the

validity of using the model for theme discovery in this context, we began with a small test

sample of 256 randomly selected trios. Each trio was submitted individually to the Anthropic

API, accompanied by a structured prompt designed to elicit information characterizing the

diverse ways educators use the AI tool in their daily work. Because no session memory persisted

across API calls, each trio was interpreted independently, eliminating carryover effects. The

prompt, reproduced in full in Appendix A, asked the model to identify the content subject

domain, pedagogical strategies, the degree to which the request addressed instructional strategy,
and the specific support the educator requested, returning results in a strict JSON structure. Table

1 presents examples drawn from the raw LLM outputs.

Table 1.

Examples of educator requests and corresponding LLM open coding results.

                                                   Pedagogical
 Request                       Content domain      strategies       Score    AI tool support
 I need to think of an         College and         None             2        Idea generation
 introductory unit idea for    career
 a college and career prep     preparation
 class for a 9th grade class
 The unit needs to be          Study skills        None             3        Lesson design
 based on skills needed to
 be successful for high
 school
 How do I prank my co-         None                None             1        Idea generation
 workers?
 Can you make a rubric for     Social studies /    Rubric           3        Rubric creation
 the mind-mapping              cultural studies    creation
 activity above?
 Thank you for providing       Math / counting     Formative        3        Assessment
 the learning target           and cardinality     assessment                creation
 K.NS.3. This will help me
 craft an authentic
 assessment aligned with
 that standard.


       After the LLM generated analytic summaries for all trios, two researchers independently

reviewed the outputs to assess their accuracy and interpretive validity. Discrepancies were

resolved through discussion and collaborative memo writing, followed by the consolidation of

analytic dimensions and an initial categorization of labels. Prior studies (e.g., Shin, 2025) have

incorporated interfaces such as ChatGPT to assist in categorizing LLM-generated labels. At this

stage, with the relatively small size of our trial sample, we completed this step manually to

deepen our human understanding of the data.
       Based on this validation and synthesis process, we refined our labeling categories to

include extended contextual information, such as references to student needs and pedagogical

frameworks mentioned in educator prompts, and identified recurring instructional tasks as

examples. These refined categories were then introduced to the LLM to support inductive coding

at scale in subsequent phases of analysis.

Axial Coding for Conceptualization and Codebook Development

       To develop a fuller understanding of educator-AI conversations, the second stage scaled

up the analysis to support comprehensive codebook construction. We expanded the dataset to

9,352 trios, retaining the trio format to preserve dialogic and instructional context while

deepening theme discovery. This phase drew on the logic of axial coding as described by Corbin

and Strauss (2014), wherein researchers relate codes by identifying underlying conditions,

contextual factors, actions, and consequences. Our goal was not to build theory but to translate

emergent patterns into a reproducible framework suitable for large-scale annotation of

educational dialogue. The final output of this stage was a preliminary codebook that captures the

instructional and professional complexity embedded in educator-AI interactions. Throughout this

process, researchers continued memoing to document rationales for code merges, disagreements,

and iterative refinements.

       In this phase, the LLM was instructed to freely generate responses for each analytic

dimension. This approach reduced variability in label naming across similar concepts, while

preserving the opportunity for surfacing new or unexpected categories. The complete prompt is

included in Appendix B. For the request “How can I create culturally relevant activities for my

Grade 3 fractions lesson plan, where a majority of my students are Spanish speakers,” for

example, the model returned the content area Math/Fractions, the grade level Grade 3, the
contextual information that a majority of students are Spanish speakers, the instructional task of

incorporating real-world examples, and the requested support of creating culturally relevant

activities.

        As in the open coding phase, two researchers randomly selected a sample of 1,000 LLM-

generated outputs to review for accuracy and interpretive quality. Discrepancies in

conceptualizing labels were resolved through collaborative meetings and memo-based synthesis.

After validation, outputs for each analytic dimension were returned to the LLM to propose label

unifications and identify common representative terms. Researchers then clustered LLM-

generated labels within each analytic dimension by grouping them based on semantic similarity,

pedagogical intent, and frequency of use. For example, terms such as “differentiated strategies”

and “differentiated support” were merged, as were “create quiz” and “generate formative

assessment.” Adjacent but distinct constructs such as “inquiry-based learning” and “project-

based learning” were intentionally preserved. This human-in-the-loop process ensured that the

emerging codebook maintained conceptual clarity while staying grounded in authentic

instructional language.

        The outcome of axial coding was a preliminary codebook with pre-determined labels for

categories including Educational Context, Content Focus, and Instructional Practices (Appendix

C). The Pedagogical Frameworks dimension remained open-coded to allow for emergent

variation. To assess the coverage and efficiency of this initial codebook and to explore the

relationships among categories and labels, it was incorporated into the prompt design for the next

stage of analysis.

Selective Coding for Structured Prompting and Codebook Refinement
       With the preliminary codebook established, the selective coding phase focused on

validating, refining, and structurally formalizing the codebook for broader application. This stage

marked the transition from open-ended annotation to a closed-vocabulary approach, wherein

predefined labels were applied to a new set of 11,539 educator-AI message trios. Unlike earlier

phases that emphasized exploratory theme generation, the LLM was now prompted to select

from existing codebook categories and return outputs in structured JSON format, enhancing

consistency and enabling efficient downstream parsing (see Appendix C for the complete

prompt). We employed claude-3-5-haiku-20241022 (Claude 3.5 Haiku) for the remainder of the

analysis, as this model became available during the study period.

       Because the coding LLM functions as a labeling instrument rather than an interpretive

one, the change of model between phases does not threaten the validity of the analysis in the way

it would if model output were treated as a finding in itself. At every phase, the LLM’s role was

confined to generating initial candidate labels and structured annotations. Human researchers

then inspected, discussed, consolidated, and reinterpreted these outputs before any category,

merge, or classification entered the codebook. The model transition therefore changes which

system proposed a given label, not who determined whether that label was retained, refined, or

discarded. We treat this human-in-the-loop structure, rather than cross-model output agreement,

as the relevant safeguard against instrument-induced artifacts, and we return to this point in the

Discussion when addressing reflexivity about LLM-assisted coding more broadly.

       This phase served three primary goals. The first was to evaluate the completeness and

usability of the preliminary codebook at scale. The second was to assess the model’s reliability in

applying structured codes under constraint. The third was to identify underrepresented,

misclassified, or emergent instructional patterns requiring refinement. To support the first goal,
we incorporated validation through “Other” annotations and human review. To maintain

inductive flexibility, the model was permitted to select “Other” when no predefined option was

appropriate, with an accompanying textual justification. Human researchers manually reviewed

all “Other” responses to determine whether recurring patterns merited new codes. For example,

emergent instructional contexts such as homeschooling and afterschool programs, which initially

emerged as labels under “Other,” were later incorporated into the codebook under the Student

Needs and Context domain.

       These steps mirror the selective coding process in traditional qualitative analysis and

follow the procedures described by Saldaña (2021). The final output of this phase was a

structured codebook, developed during the coding process to represent meaningful categories

and their interrelationships through code pruning and consolidation. To enhance analytic

tractability, the research team evaluated code frequency and semantic distinctiveness across the

structured annotations. Low-frequency codes that lacked conceptual clarity or were frequently

misapplied were either merged with related categories or removed. For example, “Gallery Walk”

was folded into broader subcategories within Collaborative Learning, and the underutilized

“Learning Progression” category was eliminated due to redundancy and inconsistent usage.

These pruning decisions were guided by code frequency thresholds, coder feedback, and

alignment with existing pedagogical literature.

       Through iterative reading, comparison, and contrast of coded outputs, the team arrived at

a hierarchical codebook structure (Domain, Category, “Item”) that organized broad professional

responsibilities and discourse markers, while also capturing fine-grained pedagogical practices

and instructional tools. The resulting codebook achieved a balance of domain relevance, internal

coherence, and scalability for large-scale analysis. At the close of this phase it comprised six top-
level domains, 18 mid-level categories, and 67 fine-grained instructional items. Table 2 provides

illustrative categories and examples of items under each domain, and the full instrument is

available as described in the Data Availability statement.

Table 2.

Domains in coded educator-AI conversations and example categories and items.

 Domain             Category                           Example item
 Instructional      Critical thinking and inquiry      “Historical thinking”
 practices          Explicit teaching                  “Modeling problem solving”
                    Project-based and real-world       “Real-world engagement and
                    learning                           scenarios”
                    Collaborative learning             “Group work”
                    Instructional routine              “Learning progression and routine
                                                       adjustments”
                Engagement and motivation              “Actionable engagement strategy”
                Differentiation and                    “Tiered scaffolding”; “Multilingual
                accessibility                          learner support”
 Curriculum and Planning                               “In-class activity design and
 content focus                                         adjustment”
                Technology integration                 “Multimedia use for instruction”
 Student needs  Classroom setting                      “Low-tech environments”
 and context    Student profile                        “Special education (IEP/504)”
                Career readiness                       “Student career exploration”

 Assessment and Assessment                             “Generate formative assessment”
 feedback       Feedback                               “Data-driven student learning progress
                                                       monitoring”
 Professional       Professional development           “Reflection on teaching practices”
 responsibilities   Communication                      “Administrative messaging”

 Other              Discourse continuity               “Format modification”
                    Non-educational queries            “Non-educational queries”


         In addition to structured categorical codes, open-text metadata fields were retained for

subject area, grade level, and explicitly mentioned pedagogical frameworks, allowing for future

stratified or filtered analyses. This stage completed the LLM-assisted portion of codebook
development. The instrument’s standing as a qualitative coding tool, however, rests on the

human coding phase described next.

                        Codebook Validation Through Human Coding

       We anchored codebook development in validation through human coding. Although the

previous steps indicated that the LLM-assisted inductive coding approach produced a

hierarchical codebook structure with 67 items across six domains, the instrument underwent

further refinement when it was systematically applied by human qualitative coders with

educational domain knowledge. This refinement was conducted by three trained researchers,

who applied the codebook to a newly collected random sample of 2,560 educator messages from

June 2025 to June 2026. This process both validated the existing codes and revealed gaps in the

instrument’s coverage as educator AI use evolved from the early adoption stage captured in the

inductive coding sample to new conversations collected over a period of one year. Most

importantly, final judgment about codebook validation and application remained grounded in

human domain expertise.

Coders, Calibration, and Agreement

       All three coders had substantial educational domain knowledge. One held a doctoral

degree in education, one held a master’s degree in education, and one had an undergraduate

minor in education along with industry research experience. Prior to independent coding, the

team completed three iterative calibration rounds using 289 messages as a hold-out set, coded by

all three coders, to establish intercoder reliability and align the coders’ interpretive frameworks.

Reliability improved across the three calibration rounds through collaborative discussion and the

development of a shared coding protocol.
       The coding was multi-label over a large codebook instead of the single-label

classification setting that conventional agreement statistics assume. Standard chance-corrected

coefficients such as Krippendorff’s alpha are built for single-category judgments and penalize

partial overlap between coders’ code sets as though it were full disagreement, even when the

coders’ interpretations substantially converge (Passonneau, 2006). We therefore report

agreement using Jaccard similarity between coders’ code sets, a measure suited to set-valued

annotation, computed pairwise across the three coders on the 289-message overlap set. Mean

pairwise Jaccard similarity was 0.52 at the codebook item level, ranging from 0.46 to 0.55

depending on the granularity at which agreement is assessed (item versus category versus

domain), indicating that coder pairs typically shared at least one assigned code and frequently the

full code set. Calibration discussions indicated that disagreement arose primarily at boundaries

between semantically adjacent categories rather than in core structural distinctions between

domains, consistent with the pattern of higher agreement at coarser code granularity. Remaining

ambiguities were resolved through structured disagreement discussions, which also informed the

codebook refinement described below.

       Of the full 2,560-message validation sample, 289 messages (11.3%) were independently

coded by all three coders as the calibration and reliability check. The remaining 2,271 messages

(88.7%) were distributed across coders for single-coder annotation following calibration.

Messages were multi-labeled, with educator prompts receiving an average of 2.05 codes per

message (5,237 code applications across 2,560 messages). This multi-label approach reflects the

compound nature of instructional work. A single prompt frequently integrates planning with

differentiation, or assessment design with standards alignment.

Codes Added During Human Coding
       During calibration, coders encountered messages that fell clearly within the scope of the

codebook’s domains but could not be adequately captured by any existing item. These recurring

gaps, identified through structured disagreement discussions and codebook boundary analysis,

motivated the addition of new codes. Five codes were added during the human coding phase,

bringing the total from 67 to 72 items and from 18 to 19 categories.

       “Culturally Responsive Teaching” (Instructional Practices, Differentiation and

Accessibility). Messages in which educators designed instruction that drew on students’ cultural

backgrounds, funds of knowledge, or community contexts appeared with sufficient frequency to

warrant a distinct code, rather than being subsumed under the broader Differentiated

Instructional Strategies item.

       “Foreign Language Skill Development” (Instructional Practices, Explicit Teaching).

A cluster of messages from world language teachers focused specifically on building target-

language proficiency. These interactions had a distinct pedagogical character (vocabulary

acquisition, grammar practice, conversational fluency) that the existing ELA Skills Development

code did not adequately capture.

       “Classroom Management” (Student Needs and Context, Classroom Setting). While

the original codebook included Student Behavioral Intervention for reactive strategies, coders

identified a set of proactive classroom management interactions (routines, procedures,

transitions, expectations) that addressed the organizational structure of learning environments

rather than individual student behaviors.

       “Class, School, or Community Event” (Professional Responsibilities,

Communication). Educators frequently sought help planning or communicating about events
(assemblies, family nights, field trips, college fairs) that did not fit within existing Professional

Communication or Administrative Documentation codes.

       “School District Finance” (Professional Responsibilities, Management). A small but

distinct set of messages from school administrators addressed budgeting, resource allocation, and

financial planning, representing a professional context not captured by existing codes focused on

instructional or communication tasks.

       These additions are methodologically informative beyond their content. Each captures

either a population of platform users, a professional context, or an evolution in use that the LLM-

assisted phases had not surfaced, despite those phases processing roughly eight times as many

trios as the human coders read messages. Sustained human application of an instrument to new

data detected coverage gaps that scale alone did not.

The Final Codebook

       The final instrument comprises 72 items organized within 19 categories and six domains

(Full codebook is included in online repository with link available in Data availability section).

Each item includes a description with explicit inclusion and exclusion criteria. This codebook

represents the consolidated output of both the LLM-human collaborative inductive development

process, which established the conceptual structure and initial item set, and the domain-

expertise-grounded deductive application process, which tested, refined, and extended the

instrument through systematic coding.

                                  The Instrument in Application

       To characterize what the validated instrument captures, we summarize code frequencies

from the human-coded validation sample of 2,560 messages, which yielded 5,237 code

applications under the multi-label protocol described above. We report these distributions at the
domain and category levels and present them as a description of the validation sample rather than

as statistically generalizable estimates for the full corpus. The two samples serve distinct

purposes within the qualitative design. The large inductive sample supports conceptualization,

meaning the development of the codebook and the analytical vocabulary, while the human-coded

sample validates the instrument and grounds descriptive claims in human interpretive authority.

       At the domain level (Table 3), Instructional Practices accounted for the largest share of

code applications (1,913; 36.5%), followed by Curriculum and Content Focus (909; 17.4%),

Assessment and Feedback (603; 11.5%), Professional Responsibilities (450; 8.6%), and Student

Needs and Context (396; 7.6%). The Other domain, which combines Discourse Continuity and

Non-Educational codes, accounted for 924 applications (17.6%), reflecting the conversational

maintenance work of format changes and continuation requests, together with occasional off-task

use, that accompanies substantive instructional interaction.

Table 3.

Domain-level distribution of code applications in the human-coded validation sample (2,560

messages; 5,237 code applications).

 Domain                               Code applications        % of total
 Instructional Practices              1,913                    36.5
 Curriculum and Content Focus         909                      17.4
 Other                                924                      17.6
 Assessment and Feedback              603                      11.5
 Professional Responsibilities        450                      8.6
 Student Needs and Context            396                      7.6


       At the category level (Figure 2), Planning was the single most frequently coded category

(777; 14.8%), followed by Explicit Teaching (646; 12.3%), Discourse Continuity (561; 10.7%),

Assessment (465; 8.9%), and Differentiation and Accessibility (396; 7.6%). The remaining
categories each accounted for less than 5% of applications. The prominence of Discourse

Continuity reflects the multi-turn character of the interactions, as educators frequently issued

requests to reformat, extend, or adjust material generated earlier in a conversation. The multi-

label protocol means that percentages describe shares of code applications rather than mutually

exclusive message counts, since a single message frequently combined codes from more than

one category.




Figure 2. Category-level distribution of code applications in the human-coded validation sample

(2,560 messages; 5,237 code applications), colored by codebook domain. Discourse Continuity

and Non-Educational are non-instructional categories and are shaded gray. Four categories that

each account for less than 2% of applications (Classroom Setting, Engagement and Motivation,

Instructional Routine, and Career Readiness) are combined.

       The validation sample’s 2,560 messages are drawn from 500 distinct conversations, and

conversation length varies considerably. In the sample, 291 conversations (58.2%) contain one to

three messages, 124 (24.8%) contain four to six, 36 (7.2%) contain seven to ten, and 49 (9.8%)

contain eleven or more, with a maximum of 68 (Figure 3). The dialogic structure that motivated
the trio unit of analysis is thus a property of the data rather than an artifact of the design, and it

underscores why units that sever educator turns from their conversational context would

misrepresent the phenomenon being coded.




Figure 3. Distribution of conversation length, measured as the number of messages exchanged

between educator and AI, in the human-coded validation sample (500 conversations).

                                              Discussion

        The pipeline reported here yielded a validated 72-item instrument from a corpus that

manual analysis could not have addressed in full. Its methodological interest, however, lies less

in the product than in what the process reveals about the division of interpretive labor between

researchers and language models. We organize the discussion around the decisions that other

research teams will face, and we characterize the extent, and the areas, in which LLM assistance

proved dependable in our case.

The Division of Interpretive Labor

        Across all three LLM-assisted phases, the model’s role was confined to proposing, and

the researchers’ role was to dispose. The LLM generated candidate labels, structured
annotations, and suggested unifications. Human researchers decided what entered the codebook,

what merged with what, and what was discarded. This division held constant even as the model’s

task shifted from open generation toward closed-vocabulary application, and it is the feature of

the design we regard as least negotiable. It is also what distinguishes the pipeline from delegating

analysis to a model and auditing a sample of its output. Every category definition in the final

instrument passed through researcher discussion, memoing, and consensus, so the interpretive

chain of custody that qualitative methodology requires remains intact and reportable.

       Framed against the concerns raised in the emerging literature, the pipeline treats the

model in the way qualitative researchers have long treated other instruments and intermediaries,

as a component whose contributions must be inspected rather than trusted (De Paoli, 2024; Tai et

al., 2024). The question we posed at the outset, to what extent and in what areas LLM assistance

can be incorporated without weakening inductive procedural rigor, receives a differentiated

answer in our data. The model was dependable for breadth, for consistency of structured

annotation, and for surfacing recurring surface patterns across tens of thousands of trios, tasks in

which its lack of fatigue and uniform attention are genuine advantages. It was not a source of

conceptual authority at any phase, and the validation results indicate that it could not have been.

The five codes added during human coding, and the boundary disagreements that calibration

surfaced, mark exactly the areas in which sustained human engagement with data does work that

scaled annotation does not.

       The design also carries a reflexive obligation that manual analysis does not. A model is

not a neutral reader. It brings dispositions from its training that shape which labels it proposes

and which phrasings it favors, and researchers who consolidate model-proposed labels are

interpreting an interpretation (Cambo & Gergle, 2022; Xu, 2026). We addressed this in three
ways. Researchers read raw data alongside model outputs at every phase rather than

encountering the corpus only through the model’s summaries. Memoing recorded not only

category decisions but occasions when model proposals were judged misleading, generic, or

skewed toward surface features. Finally, the human coding phase confronted the instrument with

data no model had preprocessed, which is where several of its silences became visible. These

practices do not eliminate the concern that model involvement can bias analysis (Ashwin et al.,

2025), but they make the sites of potential bias inspectable, which is what reflexivity can

realistically promise.

The Unit of Analysis as a Methodological Commitment

       The choice of overlapping conversational trios was among the most consequential design

decisions in the pipeline, and it was made on qualitative grounds in addition to the computational

ones. Educator-AI interaction is dialogic, and an educator turn read without the response it

answers loses its instructional meaning. The trio preserved enough context to code intent while

remaining small enough for consistent model processing, and the overlap between consecutive

trios kept conversational continuity visible. The conversation length distribution in the validation

sample, where more than 40% of conversations extend beyond three messages, confirms that

context-severing units would have misrepresented a substantial share of the corpus. We offer the

trio not as a universal answer but as an illustration that unit-of-analysis decisions in LLM-

assisted work remain interpretive decisions, to be argued from the structure of the phenomenon

rather than defaulted from token limits.

Measuring Agreement Under Multi-Label Coding

       Validation raised a measurement problem that LLM-assisted studies inherit from

qualitative methodology but rarely confront. Multi-label coding with a large codebook does not
fit the assumptions of the chance-corrected coefficients conventionally used to evidence

reliability, and forcing it into that mold penalizes partial convergence as full disagreement

(Passonneau, 2006). Reporting Jaccard similarity over code sets, at multiple levels of the code

hierarchy, gave a truthful picture of where coders converged and where they diverged, and the

granularity gradient in our results, with agreement rising from item to category to domain level,

localized disagreement at semantic boundaries between adjacent codes rather than in the

instrument’s structure. We suggest that researchers validating large hierarchical codebooks

report agreement at each level of the hierarchy, since a single coefficient at the finest granularity

understates the reliability of the structure while a single coarse coefficient overstates the

reliability of the items.

Instrument Stability Across Model Change

        Commercial LLMs change on timescales much shorter than qualitative projects. Our

pipeline crossed one such change, moving between model versions between the axial and

selective phases. The design absorbed this transition because the model was positioned as a

labeling instrument whose outputs were always subject to human disposition, so a change of

model changed which system proposed labels, not who decided their fate. Research designs in

which model output is itself the finding do not have this protection, and we regard the instrument

stance, together with full archiving of prompts, as the practical safeguard available to teams

working with models they do not control.

What Human Coding Contributed

        The validation phase repaid its considerable cost in three currencies. It produced

reliability evidence that no amount of LLM-internal consistency can supply, since the claim at

issue is whether trained humans can apply the instrument, not whether a model can. It extended
the instrument’s coverage in ways the LLM-assisted phases had not, including codes reflecting

culturally responsive teaching, world language instruction, and administrative finance, several of

which correspond to user populations or uses that grew over the year the validation sample

spans. It also disciplined the codebook’s boundaries, since the calibration discussions that

resolved disagreements doubled as tests of whether inclusion and exclusion criteria were writable

and teachable. A pipeline that had stopped at the end of the selective phase would have delivered

a plausible instrument with none of these warrants. We therefore see human application not as a

check appended to an LLM method but as a constitutive phase of it.

                                           Limitations

       Several limitations bound the account offered here. First, all data originate from one AI

platform, and the codebook’s domains reflect the professional activity that platform supports.

Teams studying other populations or platforms should expect the instrument’s structure to

transfer more readily than its items. Second, the pipeline used specific commercial models

available during the study period, and although we have argued that the human-in-the-loop

structure buffers the design against model change, the particular candidate labels the models

proposed are not reproducible in the strict sense. The prompts, the procedures, and the human

decision points are what this article can make generalizable. Third, agreement among human

coders, while adequate for multi-label coding at this codebook size and interpretable through its

granularity gradient, leaves room for improvement, and the calibration protocol we describe is

part of the method precisely because independent application without it would have been weaker.

Finally, we observe educator requests and platform responses, not classroom implementation,

and the codebook characterizes what educators sought from the AI rather than what they

subsequently did with it.
                                            Conclusion

       This article documented a human-LLM collaborative pipeline that adapted open, axial,

and selective coding to develop, and then validated through systematic human coding, a

hierarchical codebook capturing K-12 educator AI use across 45,000 messages. The pipeline’s

answer to the question of LLM assistance in qualitative analysis is conditional rather than binary.

Language models contributed scale, consistency, and candidate structure in the phases where

those qualities matter, while conceptual authority, boundary judgment, and the detection of

coverage gaps remained the work of researchers with domain expertise, and the validation phase

demonstrated that this human work was not residual but generative, extending the instrument in

ways scaled annotation had not. We offer the procedures, prompts, and decision points reported

here as a template that other qualitative research teams can adapt, contest, and improve as the

methodological conversation about language models in qualitative inquiry develops.

Data Availability

       The educator-AI conversation data analyzed in this study contain potentially identifying

professional context and cannot be shared per privacy agreement. The full codebook, the

complete LLM prompts, and replication scripts with synthetic data templates are publicly

available in the study’s replication repository:

https://osf.io/ju59q/overview?view_only=96afb71945044b8794e113f9763cc74a (anonymous

repository for peer review). The coding results are available upon request.

                                            References

Ashwin, J., Chhabra, A., & Rao, V. (2025). Using large language models for qualitative analysis

       can introduce serious bias. Sociological Methods & Research, 55(3), 795-839.

       https://doi.org/10.1177/00491241251338246
Barany, A., Nasiar, N., Porter, C., Zambrano, A. F., Andres, J. M. A. L., Bright, D., Baker, R. S.,

       et al. (2024). ChatGPT for education research: Exploring the potential of large language

       models for qualitative codebook development. In Proceedings of the 25th International

       Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Education (AIED 2024). Springer.

Cambo, S. A., & Gergle, D. (2022). Model positionality and computational reflexivity:

       Promoting reflexivity in data science. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human

       Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’22). ACM.

       https://doi.org/10.1145/3491102.3501998

Charmaz, K. (2006). Constructing grounded theory: A practical guide through qualitative

       analysis. Sage.

Chew, R., Bollenbacher, J., Wenger, M., Speer, J., & Kim, A. (2023). LLM-assisted content

       analysis: Using large language models to support deductive coding. arXiv preprint

       arXiv:2306.14924.

Cheah, Y. H., Lu, J., & Kim, J. (2025). Integrating generative artificial intelligence in K-12

       education: Examining teachers’ preparedness, practices, and barriers. Computers and

       Education: Artificial Intelligence, 8, 100363.

Corbin, J. M., & Strauss, A. (1990). Grounded theory research: Procedures, canons, and

       evaluative criteria. Qualitative Sociology, 13(1), 3-21.

       https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00988593

Corbin, J., & Strauss, A. (2014). Basics of qualitative research: Techniques and procedures for

       developing grounded theory (4th ed.). Sage.
De Paoli, S. (2024). Performing an inductive thematic analysis of semi-structured interviews

       with a large language model: An exploration and provocation on the limits of the

       approach. Social Science Computer Review, 42(4), 997-1019.

Dunivin, Z. O. (2024). Scalable qualitative coding with LLMs: Chain-of-thought reasoning

       matches human performance in some hermeneutic tasks. arXiv preprint

       arXiv:2401.15170.

Esbenshade, L., Sarkar, S., Nucci, D., Edwards, A., Nielsen, S., Rosenberg, J. M., Liu, A., Tian,

       Z., Sun, M., Zhang, Z., Han, T., Lapicus, Y., & He, K. (2025). Emerging patterns of

       GenAI use in K-12 science and mathematics education. arXiv.

       https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2509.10747

Friedman, C., Owen, A., & VanPuymbrouck, L. (2024). Should ChatGPT help with my

       research? A caution against artificial intelligence in qualitative analysis. Qualitative

       Research, 25(5), 1062-1088. https://doi.org/10.1177/14687941241297375

Gao, J., Shu, Z., & Yeo, S. Y. (2025). MindCoder: Automated and controllable reasoning chain

       in qualitative analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.00775.

Kristensen-McLachlan, R. D., Canavan, M., Kárdos, M., Jacobsen, M., & Aarøe, L. (2025). Are

       chatbots reliable text annotators? Sometimes. PNAS Nexus, 4(4), pgaf069.

       https://doi.org/10.1093/pnasnexus/pgaf069

Liu, A., & Sun, M. (2025). From voices to validity: Leveraging large language models (LLMs)

       for textual analysis of policy stakeholder interviews. AERA Open, 11(1), 1-23.

       https://doi.org/10.1177/23328584251374595
Matta, C., Nordmark, S., & Masiello, I. (2026). AI could undermine qualitative research.

       Luckily, we have a plan. International Journal of Qualitative Methods, 25, 1-12.

       https://doi.org/10.1177/16094069261456950

Misra, R., Dahal, R., Kirk, B., Khan, R., Dogan, G., Chataut, R., & Gyawali, P. (2026). Large

       language models in qualitative analysis: Comparing traditional and researcher-interpreted

       approaches. International Journal of Qualitative Methods, 25, 1-15.

       https://doi.org/10.1177/16094069261426100

Nelson, L. K., Burk, D., Knudsen, M., & McCall, L. (2021). The future of coding: A comparison

       of hand-coding and three types of computer-assisted text analysis methods. Sociological

       Methods & Research, 50(1), 202-237. https://doi.org/10.1177/0049124118769114

Passonneau, R. J. (2006). Measuring agreement on set-valued items (MASI) for semantic and

       pragmatic annotation. In Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Language

       Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2006) (pp. 831-836). European Language Resources

       Association.

Saldaña, J. (2021). The coding manual for qualitative researchers (4th ed.). Sage.

Schroeder, H., Aubin Le Quéré, M., Randazzo, C., Mimno, D., & Schoenebeck, S. (2025). Large

       language models in qualitative research: Uses, tensions, and intentions. In Proceedings of

       the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’25). ACM.

       https://doi.org/10.1145/3706598.3713120

Shin, E. (2025). Co-coding classroom dialogue: A single researcher case study of ChatGPT-

       assisted analysis in science education. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning.

       https://doi.org/10.1111/jcal.70089
Tai, R. H., Bentley, L. R., Xia, X., Sitt, J. M., Fankhauser, S. C., Chicas-Mosier, A. M., &

       Monteith, B. G. (2024). An examination of the use of large language models to aid

       analysis of textual data. International Journal of Qualitative Methods, 23, 1-14.

       https://doi.org/10.1177/16094069241231168

Than, N., Fan, L., Law, T., Nelson, L. K., & McCall, L. (2025). Updating “The future of

       coding”: Qualitative coding with generative large language models. Sociological Methods

       & Research, 54(3), 849-888. https://doi.org/10.1177/00491241251339188

Wang, Q., Erqsous, M., Barner, K. E., & Mauriello, M. L. (2025). LATA: A pilot study on

       LLM-assisted thematic analysis of online social network data generation experiences.

       Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, 9(2), Article CSCW124.

       https://doi.org/10.1145/3711022

Xu, W. (2026). Doing thematic analysis in the age of generative AI: Practices, ethics and

       reflexivity. International Journal of Qualitative Methods, 25, 1-14.

       https://doi.org/10.1177/16094069261425173

Zaimoğlu, S., & Dağtaş, A. (2025). Teacher cognition and practices in using generative AI tools

       to support student engagement in EFL higher-education contexts. Behavioral Sciences,

       15(9), 1202.



Appendix A. Prompt for Open Coding

       You are an expert educator. Your task is to identify K-12 educational components in the

chunk of educator-AI dialogue.

You are provided with a request, its response, and corresponding follow-up request if available.
Request: {request}

Response: {response}

Follow-up Response: {follow-up response}



1. Content Subject Domain Area:

 Output the specific subject and its domain areas if applicable

 (e.g., "Math/Geometry", "Science/Physics", "Science/Motion").



2. Pedagogical strategies:

 Output specific strategies if applicable

 (e.g., "Formative Assessment", "Group Work", "Student Discourse",

 "Connect to Real-world").



3. Instructional Strategy (1-5 scale):

 - 5: The command clearly addresses instructional strategies.

 - 4: Touches on strategies but lacks depth.

 - 3: Implies strategies without a clear focus.

 - 2: Vaguely references instructional strategies.

 - 1: No instructional strategy mentioned.



4. Request for AI Tool Support:

 Output the specific support the teacher is asking for.
Format your responses for each item in short phrases.

Provide the results in the strict JSON structure:



{

    "Request": {request},

    "results": {

        "Content subject domain area": "subject area" or null,

        "Pedagogical strategies": "strategy" or null,

        "Instructional Strategy": score,

        "Request for AI Tool Support": "support" or null

    }

}

Appendix B. Prompt for Open Coding (Expanded Schema)

            You are an expert educator. Your task is to identify K-12 educational components

in the chunk of educator-AI dialogue.

You are provided with a request, its response, and corresponding follow-up request

if available.



Request: {request}

Response: {response}

Followup Request: {followup_request}



1. Content Subject Domain Area:
 Output the specific subject and its domain areas if applicable

 (e.g., "Math/Geometry", "Science/Physics", "Science/Motion",

 "Social Science").



2. Contextual Information:

 Output components that are specifically contextualized for the teacher's

 K-12 educational setting. For example, grade level, student demographics,

 instructional challenges, student needs such as Special Education (IEP/504)

 or English Language Learners (ELLs), or teacher needs.

 If grade level is identified, format grades as:

 "Grade_K", "Grade_1", "Grade_10", or "Grade_Hs".



3. Instructional Tasks:

 Output specific instructional tasks or pedagogical strategies requested

 (e.g., "Formative Assessment", "Group Work", "Student Discourse",

 "Incorporate Real-world Example", "Reflective Learning",

 "Deep Questions").



4. Instructional Strategy (1-3 scale):

 - 3: The request clearly addresses instructional strategies.

 - 2: Implies or touches on strategies but lacks a clear focus.

 - 1: No instructional strategy mentioned or implied.
5. Learning Progression (1-3 scale):

 Output keywords describing students' prior knowledge or ideas assumed

 or referenced in the request.



6. Pedagogical Frameworks:

 Output any explicitly referenced pedagogical frameworks

 (e.g., "UDL", "World Cafe").



7. Request for AI Tool Support:

 Output the specific AI support requested

 (e.g., translation, rubric creation).



8. Category:

 Categorize the AI response using ONE label:

 - Information

 - Explanation

 - Guidance

 - Question

 - Summarization



 Notes:

 - "Question" applies only to clarifying or contextual questions.

 - Do NOT include generic follow-up questions.
Follow the output format requirement strictly.

DO NOT add additional text or reasoning.

Provide results in the strict JSON structure:



{

    "Results": {

        "Content subject domain area": "subject_area" or null,

        "Contextual Information": "educational_context" or null,

        "Instructional Tasks": "task" or null,

        "Instructional Strategy": score,

        "Learning Progression": "prior ideas" or null,

        "Pedagogical Frameworks": "framework" or null,

        "Request for AI Tool Support": "support" or null,

        "Response Category": "category label" or null

    }

}

Appendix C. Prompt for Selective Coding

            The selective coding prompt embedded the preliminary codebook as a closed vocabulary.

The model was instructed to match each trio against predefined label lists for subject area, grade

level, educational context, content focus, and instructional practices, selecting “Other” with a

brief specification when no predefined label applied, and to return results in a strict JSON
structure. The complete prompt, including the full label lists, is available with the codebook as

described in the Data Availability statement.
