                                        Supporting Serendipity: Opportunities and Challenges for
                                        Human-AI Collaboration in Qualitative Analysis




arXiv:2102.03702v1 [cs.HC] 7 Feb 2021
                                        JIALUN AARON JIANG, University of Colorado Boulder, USA
                                        KANDREA WADE, University of Colorado Boulder, USA
                                        CASEY FIESLER, University of Colorado Boulder, USA
                                        JED R. BRUBAKER, University of Colorado Boulder, USA
                                        Qualitative inductive methods are widely used in CSCW and HCI research for their ability to generatively
                                        discover deep and contextualized insights, but these inherently manual and human-resource-intensive pro-
                                        cesses are often infeasible for analyzing large corpora. Researchers have been increasingly interested in ways
                                        to apply qualitative methods to “big” data problems, hoping to achieve more generalizable results from larger
                                        amounts of data while preserving the depth and richness of qualitative methods. In this paper, we describe a
                                        study of qualitative researchers’ work practices and their challenges, with an eye towards whether this is an
                                        appropriate domain for human-AI collaboration and what successful collaborations might entail. Our ﬁnd-
                                        ings characterize participants’ diverse methodological practices and nuanced collaboration dynamics, and
                                        identify areas where they might beneﬁt from AI-based tools. While participants highlight the messiness and
                                        uncertainty of qualitative inductive analysis, they still want full agency over the process and believe that AI
                                        should not interfere. Our study provides a deep investigation of task delegability in human-AI collaboration in
                                        the context of qualitative analysis, and oﬀers directions for the design of AI assistance that honor serendipity,
                                        human agency, and ambiguity.
                                        CCS Concepts: • Human-centered computing → Collaborative and social computing theory, con-
                                        cepts and paradigms; Collaborative and social computing design and evaluation methods.
                                        Additional Key Words and Phrases: Qualitative research; interview; AI; human-AI collaboration
                                        ACM Reference Format:
                                        Jialun Aaron Jiang, Kandrea Wade, Casey Fiesler, and Jed R. Brubaker. 2021. Supporting Serendipity: Opportu-
                                        nities and Challenges for Human-AI Collaboration in Qualitative Analysis. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact.
                                        5, CSCW1, Article 94 (April 2021), 23 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3449168

                                        1    Introduction
                                               “You’ve got 500 codes ﬁrst and then you’ve got notes everywhere all over them.” (P05)
                                           Hours of interviews and observations, pages of transcripts and ﬁeld notes, and the large number
                                        of codes, labels, and post-it notes that follow are a familiar sight to any qualitative researcher. Qual-
                                        itative research, known for its ability to deeply understand rich in-situ practices and experiences,
                                                                                                                                                                          94
                                        Authors’ addresses: Jialun Aaron Jiang, University of Colorado Boulder, Department of Information Science, 1045 18th
                                        St., Boulder, CO, 80309, USA, aaron.jiang@colorado.edu; Kandrea Wade, University of Colorado Boulder, Department of
                                        Information Science, 1045 18th St., Boulder, CO, 80309, USA, kandrea.wade@colorado.edu; Casey Fiesler, University of
                                        Colorado Boulder, Department of Information Science, 1045 18th St., Boulder, CO, 80309, USA, casey.ﬁesler@colorado.edu;
                                        Jed R. Brubaker, University of Colorado Boulder, Department of Information Science, 1045 18th St., Boulder, CO, 80309,
                                        USA, jed.brubaker@colorado.edu.

                                        Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
                                        provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
                                        the full citation on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be
                                        honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists,
                                        requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
                                        © 2021 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
                                        2573-0142/2021/4-ART94 $15.00
                                        https://doi.org/10.1145/3449168


                                                                  Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 5, No. CSCW1, Article 94. Publication date: April 2021.
94:2                                                                                             Jialun Aaron Jiang et al.


is widely used in CSCW and HCI for developing human-centered understandings of computing
systems. However, qualitative research is also, by its nature, manual and laborious. While the scale
of data generated by methods like interviews and ethnography can be viewed as “small” in our cur-
rent world of “big data,” it nevertheless can be overwhelming to humans, and requires tremendous
human eﬀort to analyze. Other qualitative methods like content analysis, on the other hand, often
directly tackle the realm of “big data” by using samples like millions of scraped online posts (e.g.,
[7]), a scale even more clearly impossible for humans to handle. Therefore, qualitative researchers
use methods such as subsampling [36] to reduce the sample size to something humans are capable
of handling, forgoing the opportunity to take advantage of the richness oﬀered by the full dataset.
   The challenge of qualitatively analyzing big data has led some to consider the potential for
artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) to assist qualitative researchers. While one may argue that qualitative
research and AI are incompatible due to their diﬀerent epistemological traditions, recent work has
discussed the conceptual similarities between machine learning (ML), a technique often used in AI,
and grounded theory methods (GTM), and proposed hybrid models that take advantage of both
types of methodology [33]. Putting this comparison to the test, one study has even shown empir-
ically that GTM and ML can produce similar results on the same data [4]. There also have been
various eﬀorts to integrate ML into qualitative research (e.g., [31, 42]), aiming to automate deduc-
tive steps of the qualitative research process—applying established codebooks to the dataset—and
reduce human eﬀort. However, the inductive step of generating the codebook through discovering
patterns and themes cannot be overlooked. Is it possible that AI can also support the inductive step
of qualitative research that ﬁnds meaning in unstructured data instead of applying already-found
meaning on a larger set of data? While human-AI collaboration seems promising for qualitative
research, is it something that qualitative researchers themselves desire? And what abilities and
qualities do people seek (or not) in AI that would make it a good collaborator? Answers to this
question will not only shed light on how we can better design AI assistance for qualitative re-
searchers, but also provide deeper insights into human-AI collaboration in ﬁelds typically seen as
human-only. n this paper, we do not seek to examine the eﬃcacy or promise of particular models
or algorithms, but to uncover the characteristics and needs unique to qualitative research to which
AI designers and developers should pay attention. While qualitative research includes many sub-
processes such as data collection and result reporting in additional to data analysis, in this paper,
we focus on the analysis process in particular because it shows the most promise for potential AI
assistance, as both prior research and our participants suggest.
   In this work, we examine the practices of qualitative researchers, and the capabilities that they
do (or do not) want assistive systems to have, through an analysis of 17 semi-structured interviews
with qualitative researchers. While the participants did not participate in the interviews with AI
or machine learning in mind, participants imagined systems that were able to automatically oﬀer
intelligent inferences and suggestions when they were asked what their imaginary “perfect tool”
would be. In this paper, we collectively refer to these systems as “AI”, following the rationale in
prior human-AI collaboration literature in CSCW [8]. We ﬁrst describe the research methods that
they use in their work, and the kinds of assistance they would like. Next, we describe the collab-
oration practices of participants whose methods involve collaboration, highlighting that reaching
consensus is a nuanced social practice that extends beyond the actual research. We then discuss
participants’ love-hate relationship with qualitative analysis: While the vagueness of qualitative
analysis induces confusion and self-doubt, this doubt is essential to their research practice and AI
should not remove that doubt in their analysis. Using a framework of task delegability, we close by
discussing how qualitative research is a unique case that deviates from the typical tasks humans
delegate to AI. While we do not (nor can we) prescribe exactly what algorithms or models should
be used, we argue that honoring uncertainty and serendipity should be a central quality of AI that

Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 5, No. CSCW1, Article 94. Publication date: April 2021.
Supporting Serendipity                                                                                             94:3


assists with qualitative research, where data labels are ﬂuid and “negatives” are not well-deﬁned
or sometimes nonexistent.

2   Related Work
2.1 Qualitative Research and Methods
Qualitative research accounts for a substantial proportion of CSCW and social computing scholarship—
more than half of the CSCW 2019 papers use qualitative methods [20], with new opportunities
for qualitative research being a constant topic in CSCW as well [18]. Qualitative researchers use a
number of diﬀerent analytic methods to generate insights, leveraging both inductive logic (to build
patterns and themes from the bottom up by organizing data into increasingly abstract units of in-
formation) and deductive logic (to check existing patterns and theories against data in a top-down
fashion). For example, thematic analysis [6] and constant comparative method [21] both describe
processes of identifying, analyzing, and reporting emergent patterns within a set of data. Informed
by the perspective of hermeneutics, interpretive textual analysis, a commonly used method in qual-
itative research, aims to understand cultures and subcultures through situated interpretation of
texts [1]. In addition to these methods that focus on analysis, grounded theory [22, 39] alternates
collecting and analyzing qualitative data in order to generate theories that are “grounded” in that
data [12]. It provides a set of systematic guidelines for analysis while maintaining ﬂexibility to ﬁt
the given set of data. Data sources in qualitative research are also diverse and overlapping, and
any of the ﬁve traditions above could draw from interview data, ﬁeld notes, and textual or visual
content [14]. Many qualitative approaches make use of open qualitative coding [39] to inductively
label and categorize emergent concepts while maintaining theoretical freedom, which is particu-
larly useful for sifting through large amounts of unstructured data. Such inductively generated
coding schemas can then be deductively applied on the full set of data.
   Strengths of qualitative work include the ability to examine a space in great detail and depth,
the adaptability of the research framework, collection of data with subtleties and complexities not
available in quantitative data, and the situating of data in the context of experience and commu-
nity [37]. Compared to quantitative research that often relies on positivism that believes that there
are observable, measurable, “objective” facts that hold true for everyone, qualitative research often
favors interpretivism, which argues that knowledge and truth are subjective and situated, and de-
pendent on people’s experiences and understandings [37]. Instead of goals such as causal determi-
nation, prediction, and generalization sought by quantitative researchers, the goals of qualitative
inquiries are “illumination, understanding, and extrapolation to similar situations” [23].
   However, there are two major challenges of qualitative work. First, qualitative analysis is largely
manual and laborious. Qualitative researchers have long used “cut and paste” methods for separat-
ing chunks of information, either physically (e.g., index cards) or in databases or spreadsheets [11].
There are now a number of qualitative analysis software tools (e.g., MaxQDA, ATLAS.ti, Dedoose)
in which researchers can highlight and assign labels to portions of text, and these tools can produce
some lightweight statistics (e.g., count) of these labels, with potentials of having more advanced
features like topic modeling. While computational tools can relieve qualitative researchers of the
burden of data management, their eﬀects on data analysis are still highly debatable. On the one
hand, qualitative researchers have argued that increasing the sample size in qualitative research
designs is not an advantage, and researchers should focus on as many distinct cases as possible
rather than as many cases as possible [41]. Using software tools that generate coding schemes
based on a large number of documents risks opportunities for creativity and serendipity that qual-
itative research is uniquely able to provide [41]. On the other hand, current qualitative methods
such as content analysis [26] can require researchers to handle such an overwhelming amount of

                         Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 5, No. CSCW1, Article 94. Publication date: April 2021.
94:4                                                                                             Jialun Aaron Jiang et al.


data that researchers may need to rely on subsampling or strategically focusing on a subset of data
[36]. However, it can be diﬃcult, if not impossible, to extrapolate the ﬁndings from the analysis
on a subset of the data to the original dataset.
   Second, the rigor of qualitative analysis is more diﬃcult to assess and demonstrate than re-
search rooted in positivist traditions that relies on measurement. There has long been a wealth
of literature from multiple disciplines focusing on the assessment of the reliability and validity
of qualitative analysis, providing guidance for publication [17], procedures for developing coding
schema [10], and design research approaches to ensure rigor in qualitative analysis [30]. CSCW
and HCI scholarship have also taken a keen interest in meta-studies of qualitative methods, such
as comparing interview methodology through diﬀerent media [15] and characterizing localized
standards of sample size at CHI [9]. McDonald et al. [32] have shown that some CSCW and CHI
papers chose to report interrater reliability (IRR) even if IRR might not be compatible with their re-
search design, which highlights a need for demonstrating reliability in qualitative research. These
two challenges suggest that qualitative research can beneﬁt from new approaches that aim to help
with handling larger amounts of data, and our study explores AI as an option to support qualitative
scholars with their research.

2.2    Machine Learning and Qualitative Research
Machine learning (ML) techniques are known for their ability to extract patterns from small sam-
ples and generalize them to larger datasets, show promising opportunities to apply traditionally
“small” data-focused qualitative methods to “big” data. Muller et al. [33] discussed conceptual sim-
ilarities between machine learning and qualitative grounded theory methods (GTM)—they both
make major claims to be grounded in the data, and they both start with and return to the data.
Through a discussion of how Straussian GTM and Glaserian GTM (the two major approaches to
GTM) are similar to unsupervised and supervised learning respectively, Muller et al. proposed
a number of hybrid iterative approaches that integrate machine learning and GTM. Baumer et al.
[4], through an empirical study, showed that ML and GTM could produce strikingly similar output
from analyzing the same survey data, and later further showcased the promise of ML through their
Topicalizer system [5]. They argue the promise of combining ML and GTM, but also caution that
the results generated from machine learning models should be a scaﬀold for human interpretation
instead of deﬁnitive answers, a point we echo in our analysis.
   Another thread of research has explored the eﬃcacy of using machine learning as a tool to sup-
port qualitative research, with an intention to automate parts of the research process. Yan et al. [42]
experimented with a human-in-the-loop approach by having a machine learning model code the
entire dataset from a pre-deﬁned codebook and having human annotators later correct the labeling,
and concluded that creating a one-size-ﬁts-all ML model for all codes in a multi-dimensional cod-
ing scheme was impossible. Paredes et al.’s [35] Inquire tool aimed to help qualitative researchers
by uncovering semantically-similar content in large-scale social media texts. Marathe and Toyama
[31] explored whether qualitative coding could be partially automated through a formative user
study and user testing of a prototype. They found that repetitive coding with a well-developed
codebook lends itself nicely to automation, but that having good IRR is crucial for automatability.
Chen et al. [13] pointed out that the goal of performance optimization in machine learning may be
at odds with the goal of discovering patterns in qualitative research where the categories evolve
over time, and suggested that a model that identiﬁes points of ambiguity (i.e., disagreements in
coding) may be more useful to qualitative researchers. It is important to note that the studies above
focused on deductive aspects of qualitative research, typically with well-deﬁned codebooks, and
not inductive practices. Our exploration extends this prior research by providing insights into the
inductive step of the initial discovery of patterns and themes.

Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 5, No. CSCW1, Article 94. Publication date: April 2021.
Supporting Serendipity                                                                                             94:5


2.3 Human-AI Collaboration
The research we have surveyed thus far shows the infeasibility of automating qualitative analysis
entirely, but also points towards ways that AI could be a collaborator that works alongside humans,
rather than a delegate that performs speciﬁc tasks. Human-AI collaboration itself is increasingly
gaining importance in CSCW scholarship. Emerging work focuses on a variety of topics from
information extraction [28] to image understanding [44], consistently highlighting the need for
transparency and explainability of AI. Mackeprang et al. speciﬁcally pointed out that at high levels
of automation, users were unlikely to challenge results provided by AI when unaccompanied by
explanations [28]. This situation, to say the least, would be undesirable in the context of qualitative
research. Based on interviews with data scientists about their perception of collaborating with
AI, Wang et al. reiterated the importance of AI transparency, and further noted that AI should be
designed to augment, rather than to automate, a point we echo in our ﬁndings [40]. Furthering this
concept of augmentation, Yang et al. proposed the idea of “unremarkable AI,” whose interaction
with humans should have the right level of unremarkableness but should signiﬁcantly improve
their work [43]. Although Yang et al.’s study is situated in the context of high-stake clinical decision
making processes, we see the notion of unremarkable AI as applicable to other contexts where AI
should not be obtrusive.
   For human-AI collaborations to be successful, the issue of what work the AI should or should
not perform needs to be addressed. Lubars and Tan proposed a framework for task delegability to
AI [27]. They enumerate four major factors to consider: the human’s motivation in undertaking
the task, diﬃculty of the task, risk associated with incorrectly completing the task, and trust in the
AI’s ability to accomplish the human’s goal. These factors, especially risk and trust, resonate with
existing concerns around AI fairness, accountability, and transparency that have been increasingly
present in human-AI collaboration scholarship. In this study, we use this task delegability frame-
work to look at the case of qualitative analysis, and show how qualitative analysis is a uniquely
challenging case for human-AI collaboration.

3   Methods
We conducted interviews to investigate the qualitative research methods used across various ﬁelds,
with speciﬁc focus given to the coding process and tools that assist in data analysis. After acquiring
IRB approval from our institution, we focused recruitment eﬀorts on participants who primarily
use qualitative research methods in their work. We recruited participants via emails to mailing lists
of departments that regularly conduct qualitative research (e.g., communication, anthropology)
at our institution, as well as public posts on social media that invited CSCW 2019 attendees to
participate. We also encourage participants to share the call for participation with other people,
resulting in a snowball sample.
   The ﬁrst two authors conducted 17 semi-structured interviews with qualitative researchers at
our institution and among the broader CSCW qualitative research community. Participants were
majority women with 2 men, 1 non-binary, and 1 agender individual. Participants ranged in age
from 25 to 45, from the ﬁelds of Information Science, Anthropology, HCI, Linguistics, and Journal-
ism. A majority of the participants were from the US, in addition to one from the UK, one from
Japan, and one from Switzerland. We do not map this speciﬁc demographic information to individ-
ual participants in order to ensure that they are not individually identiﬁable. Fourteen interviews
were conducted in-person, and three remote. Interviews lasted from 20 to 70 minutes, depending
on the depth of the responses given. Table 1 lists our participants along with their ﬁeld of study and
academic position. Participants were compensated with a $30 Amazon gift card upon completion
of the interview.

                         Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 5, No. CSCW1, Article 94. Publication date: April 2021.
94:6                                                                                             Jialun Aaron Jiang et al.


                                           Table 1. Participant details.


                     Participant ID        Academic Position               Field of Study

                             P01              Y1 Ph.D. student          Information Science
                             P02              Y2 Ph.D. student          Information Science
                             P03              Y1 Ph.D. student          Information Science
                             P04              Y3 Ph.D. student             Anthropology
                             P05              Y1 Ph.D. student             Anthropology
                             P06              Y4 Ph.D. student                   HCI
                             P07              Y6 Ph.D. student          Information Science
                             P08              Y3 Ph.D. student          Information Science
                             P09              Y3 Ph.D. student                   HCI
                             P10              Y4 Ph.D. student             Communication
                             P11                   Postdoc                       HCI
                             P12                  Professor                Anthropology
                             P13                  Professor                Communication
                             P14                   Postdoc              Information Science
                             P15              Y6 Ph.D. student               Linguistics
                             P16              Y3 Ph.D. student               Linguistics
                             P17              Y4 Ph.D. student               Journalism



   Our interview protocol focused on how qualitative researchers collect and analyze their data,
taking a broad exploratory approach. Interview questions included what methods the participants
use, if there are any tools they use to assist in their work, attitudes and opinions about qualita-
tive coding as a process, and relationship dynamics between collaborators. During the interviews,
we asked participants to describe a current or most recent qualitative research project they have
conducted, including scope, scale, and timing, in as much detail as possible. We then asked partic-
ipants to describe their collaboration practices if relevant. The next section of questions focused
on the software and tools the participants use for their data collection and analysis. We also asked
participants for their attitudes and opinions on the coding process, including what they enjoyed
about it and where there might be pain points. Finally, we asked participants to talk about what
kind of assistance they would like if they had a perfect tool, and areas of their research where
they did not want assistance. As mentioned in the introduction, we did not speciﬁcally ask partic-
ipants about “AI assistance” so as to prevent leading them to answers about the term “AI” without
a shared, concrete idea of what “AI” means. Instead, we asked what kind of assistance that they
envisioned in a perfect tool, and their responses led us to consider AI as a potential solution, and
ultimately human-AI collaboration as the focus of this paper.

Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 5, No. CSCW1, Article 94. Publication date: April 2021.
Supporting Serendipity                                                                                             94:7


   We performed a thematic analysis of the interview transcripts [6]. Prior to analysis, all inter-
views were transcribed, anonymized, and assigned the participant IDs presented here. The ﬁrst
author initially engaged in one round of open coding, using the software MaxQDA. Then the
second author, after reading the transcripts, discussed preliminary emerging code groups such as
“help with the mess” or “feeling of doing it right” with the ﬁrst author. Two more rounds of iterative
coding helped us combine similar code groups into higher order categories such as “disciplinary
diﬀerences.” The ﬁrst author used these categories to produce a set of descriptive theme memos
[38] that described each category with grounding in the interview data. All authors then discussed
and updated the memos regularly to reveal the relationships between the categories and ﬁnally
clariﬁed the themes, which resulted in the ﬁve main ﬁndings we discuss below.

4 Findings
Our ﬁndings document qualitative researchers’ current practices and needs that AI needs to sup-
port, and discuss their unique, nuanced challenges where AI should not be applied. We begin by
describing the methods participants used in their qualitative research, and the kinds of assistance
that participants desired from software tools. Next, we discuss the complex collaboration dynam-
ics in collaboration-heavy disciplines by highlighting that reaching consensus is a nuanced social
practice that extends beyond the discussion of the research project itself. We then discuss partic-
ipants’ struggle with conﬁdently conducting qualitative research, highlighting the central role of
uncertainty in qualitative analysis. Finally, we discuss participants’ connection with and need for
agency over the analysis of their data despite their self-doubt. From here, we conclude by revealing
the bottom line that AI assistance should not cross—they should not replace human researchers in
doing the analysis.

4.1 Qualitative Research Practices
Our participants used a variety of methods in their qualitative research. Among them, interviews
were the most common data collection method, used by 15 participants across 6 ﬁelds. Others that
were common included participant observation (7 participants), and note taking (4 participants).
Participants also described data collection methods speciﬁc to their ﬁeld or discipline, such as Jef-
fersonian transcribing in linguistics, oral history in journalism, and ethnography in anthropology.
Compared to the varied data collection methods, participants’ descriptions of their analysis meth-
ods, while having varied names and granular details, broadly converged to a process of inductively
identifying interesting pieces of data then ﬁnding patterns among them. While we acknowledge
that qualitative methods entail a much broader range than what our participants reported, our
analysis here only focuses on the methods our participants used. Table 2 shows the complete list
of research methods that participants used.
   Surveying the practices of qualitative researchers runs into some challenges due to terminology.
While many of the participants share similar research practices, they referred to these practices
with diﬀerent terms. These diﬀerences not only exist across disciplines, but within disciplines
as well. For example, P06 referred to the process of inductively building a codebook then deduc-
tively labeling according to the codebook as “thematic analysis,” while P01 and P12 called the same
process “content analysis.” Many participants referred to the common grounded theory research
method of ﬁrst identifying data snippets of interest and assigning them descriptive labels, then
generating deeper insights from these labels (sometimes with the explicit process of categorizing
these labels). However, participants have diﬀerent terms for both steps. Terms for the ﬁrst step—
identifying interesting units of data—included “qualitative coding,” “open coding,” “inductive cod-
ing,” and “highlighting unusual things.” Participants’ terms for insight generation are even more
varied, from “memoing” “aﬃnity mapping” to descriptive phrases without a proper term—“seeing

                         Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 5, No. CSCW1, Article 94. Publication date: April 2021.
94:8                                                                                             Jialun Aaron Jiang et al.


 Table 2. Qualitative research methods used by participants. Here, we report the methods in participants’
                       own words, so the same term may refer to diﬀerent methods.

                                                                Data                Data
   Participant       Field of Study      Type of Data         Collection           Analysis              Software
                                                               Methods             Methods
                                                                  Semi-
                                           Interview
                                                               structured        Open Coding,
                      Information         transcripts,
       P01                                                     interview,          “seeing             Google Docs
                        Science          API documen-
                                                                 content           themes”
                                            tations
                                                                analysis
                                                                                   Qualitative
                      Information           Interview                                 coding,
       P02                                                     Interview                                 MaxQDA
                        Science            transcripts                              “forming
                                                                                     themes”
                                                                                    Inductive
                                            Interview
                                                                                      coding,
                      Information          transcripts,     Interview, note
       P03                                                                        “coming up                None
                        Science             interview           taking
                                                                                       with
                                              notes
                                                                                   categories”
                                                                                     Coding,
                                           Field notes,
                                                             Ethnography,         transcribing
                                              voice
                                                              participant               into
       P04           Anthropology           recording,                                                      None
                                                             observation,        International
                                              video
                                                               interview            Phonetic
                                            recording
                                                                                    Alphabet
                                            Interview         Participant          “Highlight
                                           transcripts,       observation,           unusual
       P05           Anthropology             voice          ethnographic             things”,         Google Docs
                                         recording, ﬁeld    interview, note       “pulling up
                                              notes              taking         bigger themes”
                                              Online                                Thematic            Yes, but did
       P06                 HCI                                  Scraping
                                           comments                                  analysis          not remember
                                                                  Semi-
                                                               structured
                                                               interview,         Transcribe,
                                            Interview
                      Information                             participant        open coding,
       P07                                 transcripts,                                                     None
                        Science                               observation,       axial coding,
                                           ﬁeld notes
                                                                 expert            memoing
                                                            interview, note
                                                                 taking
                                            Interview          Interview,
                      Information                                                 Transcribe,
       P08                                 transcripts,       participant                                ATLAS.ti
                        Science                                                      code
                                           ﬁeld notes         observation
                                                                                “Classiﬁcation
                                            Interview          Interview,
                                                                                   process to
       P09                 HCI             transcripts,       participant                                  Enable
                                                                                 organize data
                                           ﬁeld notes         observation
                                                                                 into themes”




Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 5, No. CSCW1, Article 94. Publication date: April 2021.
Supporting Serendipity                                                                                              94:9


                                    Interviews,                 Interview,         Transcribing,
       P10          Communication ﬁeld notes, eye              experiment,        coding, aﬃnity         ATLAS.ti
                                   tracking data               eye tracking          mapping
                                     Interview
                                                                   Semi-          Note taking,
                                       notes,
       P11             HCI                                      structured       coding, “seeing           Excel
                                     interview
                                                                interview           themes”
                                      excerpts
                                                                                       Content
                                                                                   analysis, open
                                                               Ethnography,
                                                                                        coding,
                                             Interview          participant
                                                                                      memoing,
       P12           Anthropology           transcripts,       observation,                              Dedoose
                                                                                    codebook &
                                            ﬁeld notes          note taking,
                                                                                   closed coding,
                                                                 interview
                                                                                        “seeing
                                                                                       themes”
                                                                                    Transcribing,
                                                                                        coding,
                                             Interview
       P13          Communication                                Interview          “coming up         Word, Excel
                                            transcripts
                                                                                    with coding
                                                                                      schemes”
                                                                                    Transcribing,
                                                                Interview,         micro-coding,
                                                                 “kind of           “inductively
                                                              ethonographic          identifying
                         Information         Interview
       P14                                                        stuﬀ”,               themes”,           NVivo
                           Science          transcripts
                                                                participant       “grouping into
                                                               observation,           categories
                                                               participation        using post-it
                                                                                         notes”
                                                                                         Public
                                             Interview
                                                                                      discourse
                                            transcripts,
                                                                                       analysis,
       P15               Linguistics       clinical texts,       Interview                              MaxQDA
                                                                                        coding,
                                           online forum
                                                                                   “categorizing
                                               posts
                                                                                         codes”
                                                                                    Transcribing
                                                                                          into
                                                                 Recording
                                               Video                                Jeﬀersonian
       P16               Linguistics                              natural                                  Word
                                             recordings                                 system,
                                                                interaction
                                                                                       “making
                                                                                  subcollections”
                                             Interview        Interview, oral         Discourse       Excel, Google
       P17               Journalism
                                            transcripts           history              analysis           Docs


themes,” “grouping into categories,” and “classiﬁcation process to organize data into themes.” Fur-
thermore, while P04, a Ph.D. student in linguistic anthropology, also used the term “coding,” she
was referring to transcribing the interviews into the International Phonetic Alphabet, instead of
identifying interesting data snippets—something we only realized halfway into our interview with
her.

                          Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 5, No. CSCW1, Article 94. Publication date: April 2021.
94:10                                                                                            Jialun Aaron Jiang et al.


   Overall, we saw participants use inconsistent vocabularies despite referring to similar methods.
While we have not heard stories of participants running into communication problems, it is pos-
sible for researchers to accidentally miscommunicate research methods and for reviewers to have
confusing expectations. Assistive tools can also create barriers by choosing to use language that
favors one particular genre of academic training.

4.2     Assistance From Computational Tools
Qualitative research is a manual, labor-intensive process that would beneﬁt greatly from compu-
tational tools, but for many participants, existing tools were not suﬃcient for their needs. In this
section, we ﬁrst describe the gaps in current tools, and then discuss the assistance that participants
desired.
4.2.1 The Inadequacy of Existing Tools. Participants used a variety of software to assist with qual-
itative research, and only three participants did not use any such tools (see Table 2). However, not
only did many tools fail participants in helping them handle large amounts of qualitative data,
participants were also unwilling to learn more sophisticated tools. According to P05, the amount
of notes and labels quickly became overwhelming, and the software tool that she used was insuf-
ﬁcient:
       I do everything in Google Docs. You’ve got 500 codes ﬁrst and then you’ve got notes
       everywhere all over them, which I’m currently trying to decipher and I’m kicking
       myself for not having a better method. (P05)
   Many participants used word processing software like Google Docs to code qualitative data, but
these software were not able to handle the overwhelming amount of codes and notes, as was the
case for P05. While some participants were aware of other software tools that have more sophisti-
cated functionalities, they did not use or stopped using them for various reasons. For example, P10
stopped using ATLAS.ti because the software broke frequently on her computer, so she returned
to her old method of using Excel and handwritten notes. P09 only used software to organize his
transcripts, and told us that learning how to use more complicated software was not worth the
eﬀort:
       Using any tools, I think it gets in the way of the analysis...I think the focus then in-
       evitably becomes on the tool and how I can manipulate and push data in order to make
       it appropriate for the tool... I need to ﬁgure out how I can ﬂuster data in a certain tool,
       in a certain way so as for it to make it easier for me later on. And I was just thinking
       it’s a waste of time. (P09)
   P09’s quote is exemplary of participants who chose not to use software tools. Their anticipated
cost was not only in learning how to work the software, but also in how to use the software in
their own way that is sustainable in the future, and these two layers of barriers precluded these
participants from using it. P14, while kept using the qualitative analysis software NVivo, limited
herself to the most basic functionalities of coding data and making code categories, then hand-
copied these categories onto post-it notes that she later put on the wall. Therefore, participants
wanted “more intuitive ways to do qualitative analysis,” and something that could help them “sort
through this mess”:
       If I had a [perfect tool] I would like a little bit more input in putting together connec-
       tions between the data. (P12)
4.2.2 Desired Assistance. Participants had diﬀerent ideas of how a tool could help them make
sense of the connections within the data, and cross-sectional analysis and visualization features
were common requests:

Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 5, No. CSCW1, Article 94. Publication date: April 2021.
Supporting Serendipity                                                                                            94:11


       I really like when I can slice and dice the data. So I want to be able to say, okay, all the
       people I’ve talked to who identify as queer, how did they feel about capitalism? I want
       to be able to do a cross-sectional analysis on multiple codes and domains. (P12)
      Just better visualizing the relationships in the data itself. So if I’m missing out codes be-
      cause I have less time, or if my co-author isn’t being participative enough or whatever,
      then I want to be assured of the fact that I was able to see all kinds of relationships.
      (P07)
   It is important to note that cross-sectional analysis and visualization features, though imple-
mented to various extents, already widely exist in qualitative analysis software such as MaxQDA
and NVivo. Prior research has noted that qualitative researchers usually conﬁne themselves to
the most basic features of qualitative analysis software [41], but here we see that the participants
still want these seemingly basic features, which suggests that the participants never discovered
these features in the ﬁrst place due to the overall diﬃculty of using the software. Furthermore, P07
speciﬁcally pointed out that the tool should not be “like the NVivo type, where I have to really
learn a lot of it.” In other words, P07 admitted that an existing tool may be able to achieve what
she wanted, but the bar of learning the software was too high.
   While participants across disciplines wanted additional help to make sense of the data, some
participants would appreciate features that are speciﬁc to their ﬁelds. For example, P05, an anthro-
pology Ph.D. student, requested features designed for their own research tradition:
       Maybe, I don’t want to say a translation tool, but kind of almost a sort of node system to
       be like ... “These were the literal words that were used, but this is kind of the underlying
       meaning to that.” (P05)
  While anthropologists might beneﬁt from features to help them note underlying meanings to
spoken words, P15, a Linguistics student, told us that being able to get down to the most granular
details of speech was important:
       I’m thinking especially in my ﬁeld where when I’m transcribing interviews, I’m actu-
       ally not just looking at what is literally being said. There’s a process of transcribing
       for tone of voice, gestures, and things. (P15)
   Unlike many of our other participants, for whom the purpose of transcribing is to transform au-
dio data into textual data that is readily analyzable, the detailed transcription—called Jeﬀersonian
transcription—is the core of P15’s analysis. Her analysis did not include categorizing snippets of
labeled data. Her unique genre of analysis means that a tool designed only for the most common
use case will be of no use to her at all.
   In addition to features that handle the mechanics and the presentation of qualitative data, par-
ticipants also wanted features that could take one step further by providing suggestions and infer-
ences, based on the way that the researcher analyzes the data:
       If there was some sort of learning algorithm, for example, that would suggest ... other
       quotes that were similar to that one. (P08)
       Or maybe even just the ability to be based on whatever magical software anyone can
       develop being, “based on the fact that you tagged it this way, we think that these are
       the more important interviews or not important, but we think that maybe you want
       to pay more attention to these.” Or be like, “You completely neglected this one. Did
       you forget about it or is there actually nothing here for you?” (P05)

                         Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 5, No. CSCW1, Article 94. Publication date: April 2021.
94:12                                                                                            Jialun Aaron Jiang et al.


   In sum, participants wanted various types of help from computational tools but often refrained
from using sophisticated tools due to their steep learning curve. While their reluctance may indi-
cate usability issues with such tools, their reluctance also suggests opportunities where AI assis-
tance could provide them the desired data representation and visualization, and only oﬀer more
sophisticated explanations and customizations if desired. The promise of AI assistance is further
highlighted by participants’ imagined intelligent suggestions—or, in P05’s words, “magical soft-
ware.”

4.3 Collaboration Dynamics
Qualitative research can often be collaborative, involving multiple researchers examining and then
reaching consensus on the same data to increase reliability and reduce individual biases. Partic-
ipants from Information Science and HCI told us that collaborative work with co-authors was
common, so it is no surprise that, when asked about features they would like in their imaginary
perfect tool, only Information Science and HCI participants mentioned collaboration features:
        While I was maintaining this online notebook, I could hypothetically, if my co-author
        had enough time, the dream scenario would be that he or she would be reading those
        notes every day and commenting on them ... So the collaborator element’s deﬁnitely
        important and could help a lot with the eventual coding and analysis process, even
        while you collect data. (P07)
   With collaboration being the norm, a natural follow-up question is how to reach consensus
when there are multiple researchers on a single project. “Consensus,” however, takes on many
diﬀerent ﬂavors and nuances, according to the participants.
   Inter-rater reliability (IRR) is often used to calculate consensus during a deductive phase of cod-
ing, but is often inappropriate for inductive analysis. Consistent with McDonald et al. ’s ﬁndings
[32], reaching consensus through IRR was rare for our participants—only two used IRR to verify
consensus, and two others mentioned IRR only to note that they did not use it in their research,
likely because our participants largely conducted interviews, of which the analyisis is often incom-
patible with IRR.
   Our participants most commonly perceived consensus as some ﬂavor of “everyone agrees,”
though agreement sometimes can be a ﬂexible and loose standard:
        Once everyone is pretty much satisﬁed and doesn’t have any complaints or questions
        or comments anymore that are signiﬁcant, and by signiﬁcant, I mean like “we have to
        change this or it’s going to ruin the study.” (P02)
   Compared to P02, P14’s standard for consensus was even more ﬂexible—there is no deﬁnition
for consensus; it is something that the researcher understands intuitively as they are doing the
research:
        [Consensus is] just like a kind of tacit knowledge thing where it’s you know when
        you see it, but it’s very hard to actually kind of deﬁne. (P14)
   P14’s view of consensus as ﬂuid highlights how it is the outcome of nuanced social practices
that is not easily explainable or deﬁnable. However, its ﬂexible nature also means that achieving
consensus might depend on the researchers’ established, implicit norms generated from having
worked together for an extended period of time, a facet often overlooked by prior conceptualiza-
tions of researcher consensus (e.g., [29]).
   These social practices, as we learned from participants, often reduce “consensus” to the decision
of a person with the ultimate decision-making power, rather than multiple researchers having

Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 5, No. CSCW1, Article 94. Publication date: April 2021.
Supporting Serendipity                                                                                            94:13


reached some level of agreement. The decision maker, however, varies. Sometimes the decision
maker is the project leader:
       If I’m leading the paper, to me it’s my decision [if we have reached consensus]. (P08)
       If the stakes are high, if I am the primary investor in a particular project then yes, I
       think I should take the decision on this. But if it’s maybe my advisor’s project I think
       I would give her the ﬁnal say in that. (P10)
  Sometimes the person with the ﬁnal say is the most senior person, who may or may not be the
project leader:
       If [my collaborators] don’t [agree], we have a little bit of a debate and I’m assuming
       the most senior person probably wins. (P03)
   While P03 did not personally have experience with the most senior person “winning” the de-
bate, as a junior Ph.D. student this was their default assumption, which suggests a tendency for
researchers (especially junior ones) to acquiesce to authoritative ﬁgures. P07 elaborated more on
this tendency, pointing out that “consensus” is the result of an negotiation of collaboration dy-
namic and power:
      I think it depends a lot on who the collaborators are and what the power relationships
      with those collaborators are ... These things are not objective ... It’s not just about what
      codes appear or what themes appear the most salient and relevant. So I think it’s more
      about the collaboration dynamics, the power, all of those things, rather than what the
      codes are seeing ... It’s literally about [power]. (P07)
  While it might seem ideal for every researcher in a team to have their opinion treated equally,
P07 directly refuted this notion, claiming that it would only jeopardize the project:
      [Collaborative qualitative analysis] would still deﬁnitely take on some hierarchy in
      what I imagine. There would still be someone who’s written more papers. There will
      still be someone who’s written fewer papers. Or still have an expert on the topic, ver-
      sus someone who’s not the expert on the topic. ... I can’t imagine there being a ﬂat
      hierarchy somewhere. And actually, that one time that it happened ... things went re-
      ally down south. The paper was about everything. It got rejected. Then there was a
      ﬁght. Then there were all these conversations about who’s contributed the most, who’s
      going to be the ﬁrst author and so on. (P07)
   MacQueen et al. [29] argued that in team-based qualitative analysis it is good practice to have
one person maintain the team codebook. While MacQueen et al.’s recommendation largely came
from a project management standpoint and maintained that the codebook development should
still be done collaboratively, here we see a case where one person being in charge of the direction
of analysis can be more beneﬁcial than a true, equally collaborative fashion. Overall, we observe
that in ﬁelds where collaboration is common, reaching consensus among researchers can often be
a nuanced social practice beyond mere agreement on the research product.

4.4 The Existential Crisis of Qualitative Researchers
Despite the variety in discipline-speciﬁc research methods, desired help from software tools, and
meanings of consensus, participants across disciplines consistently told us about one feeling: qual-
itative research is hard and messy.
       Sometimes it can be a little bit frustrating when you’re sort of in that process where
       you’re like, “Is this a theme? Is that a theme?” Then sometimes when you’re going
       through ... a couple of interviews in and you’re like, "Oh there’s a theme," and then

                         Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 5, No. CSCW1, Article 94. Publication date: April 2021.
94:14                                                                                            Jialun Aaron Jiang et al.


        you’re like, “Oh fuck, that’s probably a theme” ... so then you have to go back to see if
        that [theme] is in [the other interviews]. (P13)
    Like P13, many participants described how qualitative analysis could be frustrating, and this
frustration often comes from researchers’ self-doubt:
        I’ll just code, and maybe it’ll be relevant and maybe it won’t be, and I’m not really
        sure ... If someone just mentions it in passing, do I use that? ... If someone has a few
        sentences about it then do I code that? Like what is useful to actually code? (P03)
        Am I drawing connections between things that aren’t necessarily connected? ... which
        also goes back to not having time to [follow up with] people and be like, “Hey, so you
        said this thing, I’m just wondering, can you expand that more?” (P05)
    P05 doubted herself when drawing what she feared were non-existent connections in the data,
and attributed it to having conducted imperfect interviews. The guilt of imperfect research was
common among participants, who felt that they could have asked better questions during inter-
views, could have used more data in the ﬁnal research product, or could have done a deeper analysis
if they had had more time:
        I didn’t really get to do maybe as much coding as I would’ve liked, or to look at as
        many complex issues as I would’ve liked. ... It was a restriction on time. (P03)
    In addition to imperfect research execution being a common source of guilt, others felt apolo-
getic for not following an ideal research methodological paradigm:
        I think I would be lying if I said that I completely allow myself to be driven by the
        data ... especially this study, for example. I did it to inform the design of potential
        technology that I wanted to build, while I’m doing the questions, I was already looking
        for particular things. ... So I think that already in the questions you have implicit codes.
        (P11)
        I feel like we’re doing it wrong. ... Especially because [we are] saying these are the
        topics that we’re interested in. That’s not very grounded theory of me. But, I don’t
        quite know how to do it otherwise, because obviously ... I’m going to look at this
        interview already from a diﬀerent perspective than, say, a psychologist. (P15)
    Participants thought their own research execution was imperfect—for example, “not very grounded
theory.” However, in participants’ own unique research projects, the “perfect” methodology may
not be the most desirable approach. While HCI (as well as CSCW) has distinguished itself as a
“discipline that has often proceeded with something of a mix-and-match approach” [16], here we
see evidence that such a hybrid paradigm—for example, being driven by the data but also having
a topical focus—is also practiced across disciplines.
    Overall, self-doubt with all parts of the research process was pervasive among participants. This
self-doubt was so strong that P07 told us the moment she had to approach the data she collected
was what she “dread[ed] the most.” Participants’ shared experience of self-doubt highlights the
inductive and interpretive nature of qualitative research, and suggests that this vagueness may
be inevitable and essential to the qualitative research process itself. While it might be tempting
to design AI that can reduce qualitative scholars’ anxiety by providing concrete suggestions from
their data, we found ample reasons why researchers might resist such assistance, which we detail
in the next section.

4.5     Don’t Do It for Me
Even though participants consistently told us how qualitative research can be full of doubt and
vagueness, they did not want AI assistance to eliminate that vagueness if it meant eliminating the

Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 5, No. CSCW1, Article 94. Publication date: April 2021.
Supporting Serendipity                                                                                            94:15


work to make sense of their messy data. Participants told us that despite the uncertainties, the new
discoveries they made through their research process were the most rewarding:
       It’s really satisfying. ... It’s those kinds of exciting Eureka moments that make research
       kind of worth it. (P14)
       My favorite style of coding is more where I’m able to bring out all of these diﬀerent
       things. ... So that’s what I really enjoy, the process of recollecting everything that
       happened, and then coming up with something. (P07)
  Participants’ comments on their unexpected new ﬁndings show that serendipity was a major
reason why participants enjoyed qualitative research. Integrity was a major factor as well. P12, for
example, described a sense of responsibility toward her project:
       How do I feel when I’m coding? Overwhelmed. I feel such a great sense of stewardship
       in the project that we’ve been discussing. I want to get it right and that makes me feel
       a lot of pressure. (P12)
  The motivations and responsibilities that researchers feel around their data and analysis may
present some hurdles for any tool meant to support their work. While some participants mentioned
that they would beneﬁt from AI-generated suggestions and inferences, these participants, with
their sense of serendipity, responsibility, and intimacy toward their research, explicitly expressed
that they needed agency over the analysis of their data, and AI should not do it for them.
       I don’t want anything to do the analysis for me. That doesn’t make sense. This is my
       interpretation of things ... It’s one of the most intimate things. ... I have these little like
       research crushes with some codes or participants. ... These [data] are my babies. (P11)
   P16, while being in Linguistics and doing a completely diﬀerent kind of analysis than P11’s,
shared P11’s feelings:
       As nice as it theoretically sounds to have something do automatic transcription for
       you, I actually would not want that even if it could do the Jeﬀersonian level of detail
       because it’s so important for you as a researcher to understand what’s happening
       in your data, doing it yourself. ... Your transcription is part of your analysis as well
       and that’s the only way for you to get your hands dirty with the data is to get in
       and see what’s happening with it. ... I don’t know of anybody who uses [professional
       transcription services] because you take a lot of pride and ownership over your data
       and it’s important to your participants and I would never want to farm that out when
       it’s your research in your research process. (P16)
   To P11 and P16, outsourcing analysis for them not only impacts research quality, it also robs
them of their emotional connection—the intimacy, pride, and ownership—with the data. Compared
to P11 and P16, P06 was slightly more open to the idea of AI-assisted analysis. However, P06 also
pointed out that the tool should be limited to the level of suggestions and that making decisions
would cross a line:
       I don’t want it to take out extra information automatically. I don’t want it to try to
       guess or try to ... well, it can try to guess, but I don’t want it to decide. ... It can do a
       suggestion, but I’m not sure if I would trust the suggestion, or actually it can suggest
       the discussion points that we need, and then we can discuss rather than decide it for
       us. (P06)
   In contrast, P14 felt even suggestions could be harmful to her research process:
       Maybe it could make suggestions, but even then I don’t know if I want it because
       it doesn’t know what my research questions are. ... I don’t want it to pick the good

                         Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 5, No. CSCW1, Article 94. Publication date: April 2021.
94:16                                                                                            Jialun Aaron Jiang et al.


        quotes for me, that’s for sure. ... I don’t want the computer to do it. I also don’t want
        the computer to inﬂuence how I’m thinking about it. ... I don’t necessarily want to be
        primed or how that’s going to aﬀect my thinking ... if it’s making this suggestion and
        now I can’t unsee it. (P14)

   While participants generally resisted complete automation of qualitative analysis, P06 and P14’s
comments show that even a low-level, suggestion-based automation (according to Parasuraman
et al.’s model of autonomy [34]) can also be undesirable. During the interview, P14 asked if there
was a machine to interfere, then “why bother?”—why bother having a human researcher at all?
According to P14, even if the researcher does not necessarily have to use or trust the suggestions,
seeing the suggestions alone can negatively impact the researcher’s interpretation and analysis,
or even worse, eliminate the meaning of human researchers.
   Overall, participants told us about their conﬂicted feelings about qualitative analysis, one that is
marked by anxiety but also intimacy and ownership. Driven by these feelings, they resisted AI to
replace them in their analysis, despite seeing its potential to augment their work. These ﬁndings
suggest that, unlike tasks typical for AI to accomplish, the objective of qualitative research is, often
intentionally, ambiguous. Furthermore, qualitative researchers value this ambiguity because it of-
fers them serendipity and opportunities for deep insights. In the discussion section, we detail how
qualitative research is a unique case for human-AI collaboration, and provide design implications
for AI assistance to honor ambiguity and serendipity.


5   Human-AI Collaboration in Qualitative Research
Our ﬁndings reveal complicated feelings participants had toward the practices involved in quali-
tative analysis. On the one hand, participants struggled with self-doubt in their research analysis
and saw the appeal of AI assistance to help them see relationships behind their data. On the other
hand, they also liked the analysis process as it is and felt connected with their data, therefore skep-
tical of AI driving the analysis. This tension between the desire of AI assistance and the need for
human agency suggests opportunities for human-AI collaboration in qualitative research, but also
draws a line that AI assistance should not cross.
   To unpack this tension, we turn to a framework proposed by Lubars and Tan to describe the
delegability of a task to AI [27]. While there were likely many small steps in the qualitative research
process (e.g., open coding, axial coding, synthesizing), our participants’ resistance of complete
automation suggested that they viewed qualitative analysis as a singular task in the context of
AI assistance, and we can reasonably speculate that AI designers (who are arguably less familiar
with qualitative analysis) might do the same. In their framework, they enumerate four factors
that must be considered when determining the appropriateness of delegating a human task to AI:
motivation, diﬃculty, risk, and trust.
   Lubars and Tan conceptualized motivation as having three components: the human’s intrinsic
motivation of carrying out the task, whether the human’s goal itself is mastering the task, and the
utility or importance of the task to the human. Our participants’ enjoyment and pride in conduct-
ing qualitative research, as well as their wish to improve their research skill, show that qualitative
research involves high motivation: participants enjoyed and were committed to conducting their
analyses. While one may assume that high motivation indicates low delegability, Lubars and Tan
did not ﬁnd statistically signiﬁcant correlation between the two variables. The lack of correlation
coincides with the sentiments of our participants, who were invested in their qualitative work but
also acknowledged the appeal of appropriate AI assistance.


Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 5, No. CSCW1, Article 94. Publication date: April 2021.
Supporting Serendipity                                                                                            94:17


   Diﬃculty also consists of three components: a person’s perceived ability to complete the task,
as well as the required human eﬀort and expertise. Lubars and Tan found a general negative cor-
relation between diﬃculty and task delegability: the more able a person perceives themselves to
complete the task, the more human eﬀort and expertise required by the task, the less delegable
the task is to AI. Qualitative research can be considered high diﬃculty, as it requires eﬀort and ex-
pertise on behalf of the researcher, which suggests its low delegability to AI according to Lubars’
and Tan’s ﬁndings. The diﬃculty of analysis is evidenced by the low conﬁdence participants had
in their analysis. While Lubars and Tan also use required social skills and creativity as dimensions
to contextualize the previous three dimensions, they are not central to the conceptualization of
diﬃculty, though one can reasonably argue that qualitative research requires high levels of both
social skills and creativity.
   Additionally, in the survey that Lubars and Tan used to evaluate their framework, they observed
that self-conﬁdence and intrinsic motivations were positively correlated—people enjoy doing tasks
that they are good at. However, the case of qualitative research serves as a unique counterexample:
not only do people enjoy doing something they are not conﬁdent about whether they are doing it
correctly, but low-conﬁdence itself is central to the outcome of qualitative research. Therefore, our
study on qualitative research challenges the current task delegability framework, and also raises
questions around the integration of AI into qualitative research: Should we consider qualitative
research as a single, uniﬁed “task” for AI to assist with? If qualitative research as a single task
should not be delegated, what parts of it are appropriate for AI to assist with?
   Qualitative research is harder to characterize in terms of the third factor: risk. Lubars’ and Tan’s
conceptualization of risk is three-fold: personal accountability in case errors happen; the uncer-
tainty, or the probability of errors; and the scope of impact, or cost or magnitude of those errors.
These three components of qualitative research all focus on errors, but “error” is inherently dif-
ﬁcult to deﬁne, if deﬁnable at all, in qualitative research to which subjective interpretations are
central: What makes a researcher’s interpretations wrong? Is there such a thing as interpretation
error? Furthermore, the concept of risk itself may be more nuanced than currently characterized,
given that Lubars and Tan did not ﬁnd signiﬁcant correlation between risk and delegability, and
the complexity of deﬁning “error” in qualitative research may also be present in other kinds of
tasks. Designers should carefully consider this ﬂexibility of qualitative research when designing
AI assistance, especially supervised models that are entirely dependent on what is “positive” or
“negative.”
   The ﬁnal factor, trust, is also nuanced in the context of qualitative research. Trust, which Lubars
and Tan also describe as containing three components, includes the perceived ability of AI to
complete the task, the interpretability of AI’s actions, and the perceived value alignment between
AI and human. As our ﬁndings have shown, participants had low trust in AI’s ability to reliably
conduct qualitative analysis. While “reliable” is often deﬁned as being consistently “correct,” our
discussion above shows correctness may not be the focus in qualitative research since error itself is
hardly deﬁnable. Instead, our ﬁndings suggest that the reliability lies in the consistent alignment of
values—that the value of qualitative research derives from creativity and serendipity [41]—between
AI and human researchers, which our participants did not trust AI to have. P14 pointed out that
she did not want any assistance because she could not “unsee” the AI suggestions, which indicates
an assumption of unwanted, negative inﬂuence from AI that values concrete, highest-probability
answers, as opposed to generative and nuanced ones sought by human-based qualitative analysis.
However, inﬂuence is inevitable in collaborative qualitative research—having human collaborators
also inﬂuences researchers’ perspectives, and it is not reasonable to have to self-isolate to achieve
the desired research integrity. Therefore, the assumed “badness” of AI inﬂuence might be because
the suggestions come from AI, rather than that the suggestions themselves are of low quality.

                         Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 5, No. CSCW1, Article 94. Publication date: April 2021.
94:18                                                                                            Jialun Aaron Jiang et al.


   The distrust of AI shared across our participants may possibly have to do with the diﬀerences
between typical behavior of humans and AI. Humans usually make suggestions like “This part of
the data is interesting and maybe you should take a look at it” (and more seasoned collaborators can
also explain why it is interesting). However, AI suggestions, generated from classiﬁcation results,
often take the deterministic form of “data X should be assigned code Y” without explanations—even
a human collaborator would be diﬃcult to trust if they could only make such suggestions. While
our participants did not explicitly mention AI’s interpretability, the well-known opaqueness of the
AI’s inner working “black box” could only exacerbate the distrust. P14’s distrust echoes with Gach
et al. ’s ﬁnding that interpersonal trust—the willingness to accept risk based on the expectation of
another person’s behavior—often gets mistranslated when it is implemented as impersonal trust
that a technical system will behave as expected [19]. This mistranslation of trust resonates with
Ackerman’s notion of sociotechnical gap [2]—how can we better technically support the kind of
interpersonal trust that we know we must support socially in qualitative research?
   Given the challenges related to risk and trust, a key consideration in the design of AI collab-
orative tools for qualitative research should be: How can we promote more interpersonal trust
between human researchers and AI collaborators in ambiguous qualitative research? One way for
AI to build trust is to provide humans with the ability to make choices and corrections [25]. If such
ability is suﬃcient, one might think that an ideal collaboration would involve ﬁrst having the AI
automatically label the entire dataset, allowing humans to correct the AI as necessary afterwards.
However, not only would such an approach meet the objections of participants (as exempliﬁed
by P14), Yan et al. [42] tried such an approach and concluded that creating a one-size-ﬁts-all ML
model for all codes in a multi-dimensional coding scheme was impossible. The low precision of
their model suggests that humans may have to do more work in correcting the AI than if they had
coded on their own. While correction is also widely present in human collaboration, it is easier to
discuss and resolve the diﬀerences with a human than with AI. Furthermore, it is also undesirable
to have too much trust—if the data to be coded is ambiguous, our results show that it’s possible
that researchers might defer to AI as the de facto tie breaker even though the situation deserves
human deliberation to uncover the rich qualitative insights underlying that ambiguity. Given the
two extremes, it may seem that oﬀering answers that provide precisely the right balance of trust
is the natural solution for AI, but “just the right balance” may never be practically achievable—the
design of AI assistance for qualitative research may need to forgo the traditional answer-provider
paradigm and leave the deliberation to humans.

5.1     From Answers to Ambiguities and Disagreements
How, then, can we preserve human researchers’ agency in ambiguous situations in AI? A good
starting point is to consider how it can play out in machine learning algorithms, a core compo-
nent in many AI systems. Chen et al. [13] point out that the goal of performance optimization
in ML may be at odds with the goal of discovering patterns in qualitative research where the
categories constantly change: while well-deﬁned data categories are essential anchors for many
machine learning algorithms, qualitative analysis does exactly the opposite by iteratively revising,
challenging, and sometimes even overhauling existing categories to reveal deeper insights buried
in the data; categories are not the end, but only a means to an end. Therefore, a machine learning
model that identiﬁes points of ambiguity and disagreement may have more utility to qualitative
researchers. This point is further supported by McDonald et al., who discussed why seeking agree-
ment might not be appropriate when codes are the process instead of the product. This work also
highlights the scenario where there is an expert researcher (or a researcher deemed as the “expert”)
in a team, in which case the other researchers defer to the expert researcher largely to maintain
the social relationship. The expert-takes-all phenomenon was common among our participants,

Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 5, No. CSCW1, Article 94. Publication date: April 2021.
Supporting Serendipity                                                                                            94:19


and we can speculate that it also broadly exists given how common advisor-student relationships
and mentor-mentee relationships are in research training. McDonald et al. [32] also discussed how
agreement can be harmful in research rooted in critical traditions (e.g., feminist HCI [3]), and the
type of “forced” agreement in this work may aggravate this harm.
   Taking the above considerations together, we can imagine an example assistive AI system that
has the following features. First, to promote ambiguity and preserve human researchers’ agency,
the system could have the researcher choose the level of suggestions it provides. For example,
the system could default to leaving the researcher on their own (i.e., do nothing) at ﬁrst, and only
later suggest interesting data snippets that the researcher has overlooked based on the researchers’
existing coding/labeling patterns (e.g., through text classiﬁcation using long short-term memory
(LSTM) networks). The system could also suggest upcoming, unexamined data snippets for the
researcher to consider, but only if the researcher speciﬁcally requests this. As demonstrated in our
analysis, unprompted suggestions of new data can lead researchers into uncertain (and possibly
unwanted) interpretive directions, a concern expressed by our participants.
   While it is possible to provide code suggestions (likely based on topic modeling), none of our
participants were enthusiastic about such an idea, ranging from hesitant to resistant. Our partici-
pants’ reactions show an interesting contrast with the promise of machine learning-based coding
shown in prior research [4, 13, 31]. Considering these ﬁndings together, we urge AI designers to
be careful in making suggestions about the exact codes or labels that a piece of data might take.
An AI system capable of making code suggestions should be clear about what this feature is and
is not (i.e., that instead of data to be coded, it makes suggestions of codes). It should also be avail-
able only upon the researcher’s request, and only after it learns enough of the researcher’s coding
patterns in a particular project.
   Second, given that collaboration was common for many of our participants, the system could
have features that further promote ambiguity and serendipity through collaboration. For exam-
ple, it could suggest data snippets (examined or unexamined) that might be worthy of further
discussion among collaborators. The system could also suggest a piece of data that a researcher
has already coded to other collaborators who are likely to disagree with that researcher. Both ex-
amples aim to encourage discussions among researchers that may spark unexpected insights, and
echo the point we made against careless coding suggestions—we envision the system to help set
researchers up to do the research, instead of doing it for them.
   Our vision above is only an example of what an assistive AI might look like, and the concrete
speciﬁcations will depend on a number of factors such as the audience for whom it is designed
(e.g., AI designed for HCI researchers vs. linguists are likely to be diﬀerent), and the underlying in-
frastructure that it needs (e.g. collaborator-based suggestions will need collaboration functionality
in the ﬁrst place). The features that we envision also illustrate that an assistive AI will necessarily
be an interactive one with mixed initiatives, some of which are already in line with principles of
mixed-initiative designs [24]. While we acknowledge that such a system still does not address the
expert-takes-all phenomenon, we are also hesitant to recommend that AI address the nuances of
the social relationship between researchers. By revealing the the expert-takes-all phenomenon in
the collaboration dynamics between junior and senior researchers, we are not calling for a techni-
cal solution to “solve” their relationship; we only hope that qualitative researchers can be aware
of this phenomenon, and strive toward more productive collaborations with it in mind.
   Uncertainty and ambiguity have long been viewed as a hindrance that costs eﬃciency and causes
mistakes. However, uncertainty is a feature rather than a bug in qualitative research. As our ﬁnd-
ings indicate, while our participants wanted AI to help them have a better grasp of the uncertainty,
they did not want it to be taken away. This very uncertainty allows qualitative researchers to dig
deeply into their data, sometimes even to build personal connections with their data, and generate

                         Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 5, No. CSCW1, Article 94. Publication date: April 2021.
94:20                                                                                            Jialun Aaron Jiang et al.


rich interpretations and insights. Our ﬁndings not only point to ways that AI can help qualitative
researchers, but also reveal ways that qualitative researchers can help each other. For example,
researchers who are not accustomed to collaboration may want to experiment with collaborating
as a way to have various perspectives that promote serendipity. Senior researchers may also want
to consider teaching junior researchers to embrace uncertainty as part of the qualitative research
training, so that they can trust themselves in doing qualitative research on a high level while also
maintaining a healthy dose of self-doubt.

6 Limitations and Future Work
Our research has several limitations. First, the majority of our participants were junior scholars,
with arguably less experience in qualitative research than more senior ones. While we believe that
a student majority is still able to provide valuable insights since they all actively conduct research,
it may nevertheless have an impact on their reported experiences and tool use.
   Second, we would like to acknowledge that the qualitative research practices documented in
this study (with the coding component in particular) are largely based on individuals, despite the
ample descriptions of collaboration dynamics that we heard. We suspect the predominance of
individual research practices is a product of the common student-advisor collaboration paradigm,
and future work may ﬁnd value in investigating more and other collaborative coding practices.
Similarly, the kind of qualitative data that our participants dealt with were predominantly text,
but the whole spectrum qualitative data is much broader, such as image, audio, and video, as some
of our participants already indicated. We encourage future work to investigate these alternative
forms of qualitative data and their analysis.
   Finally, as we mentioned in the introduction, our work does not provide guidance for speciﬁc
models or algorithms to be used. It is a ﬁrst step toward successful human-AI collaboration in
qualitative research by envisioning a world where AI assistance of qualitative research is possible,
and laying out the promises and perils of that world. We hope that our ﬁndings will inform future
in-depth studies of how speciﬁc AI systems can be adopted in qualitative research.

7   Conclusion
Qualitative inductive methods are widely used in CSCW and HCI research for their ability to gen-
eratively discover deep and contextualized insights, but these inherently manual and laborious
processes are infeasible for analyzing large corpora, sacriﬁcing the richness provided by these
data. This study explores the potential of AI for assisting humans in conducting qualitative re-
search by investigating current qualitative research practices and revealing where AI can come
into play. We describe the methodological practices participants have, the insuﬃciencies of cur-
rent tools to support these practices, and desired capabilities of their imaginary perfect tool. We
also show that participants, when they collaborate, have complex and nuanced collaboration dy-
namics, and consensus reaching can be a negotiation of social relationships beyond the research
project itself. Furthermore, while participants struggle with the messiness and uncertainty of qual-
itative analysis, they also want full agency of the process and insist that AI should not take it away
from them. We argue that qualitative analysis is a unique case for human-AI collaboration because
uncertainty is essential to qualitative analysis itself. The design of AI assistance should embrace
this uncertainty and support serendipity by promoting human agency, instead of being the arbiter
that aims to reduce uncertainty as AI has been traditionally conceptualized.

Acknowledgments
We thank the reviewers for their signiﬁcant time and care in improving this paper. We also thank
our participants, many of whom sacriﬁced their conference time to participate in our study. Finally,

Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 5, No. CSCW1, Article 94. Publication date: April 2021.
Supporting Serendipity                                                                                               94:21


we thank Brianna Dym, Steven Frost, Katie Gach, Shamika Goddard, Jacob Paul, Anthony Pinter,
and Morgan Klaus Scheuerman for their help and feedback on the early drafts of this work.
  This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation Award #1764089.


References
 [1] 2017. Textual Analysis. In The SAGE Encyclopedia of Communication Research Methods. SAGE Publications, Inc, 2455
     Teller Road, Thousand Oaks California 91320. https://doi.org/10.4135/9781483381411.n623
 [2] Mark S. Ackerman. 2000. The Intellectual Challenge of CSCW: The Gap Between Social Requirements and Technical
     Feasibility. Human–Computer Interaction 15, 2-3 (Sept. 2000), 179–203. https://doi.org/10.1207/S15327051HCI1523_5
     Publisher: Taylor & Francis _eprint: https://doi.org/10.1207/S15327051HCI1523_5.
 [3] Shaowen Bardzell. 2010. Feminist HCI: taking stock and outlining an agenda for design. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
     Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’10). Association for Computing Machinery, Atlanta, Georgia,
     USA, 1301–1310. https://doi.org/10.1145/1753326.1753521
 [4] Eric P. S. Baumer, David Mimno, Shion Guha, Emily Quan, and Geri K. Gay. 2017. Comparing Grounded Theory and
     Topic Modeling: Extreme Divergence or Unlikely Convergence? Journal of the Association for Information Science and
     Technology 68, 6 (June 2017), 1397–1410. https://doi.org/10.1002/asi.23786
 [5] Eric P. S. Baumer, Drew Siedel, Lena McDonnell, Jiayun Zhong, Patricia Sittikul, and Micki McGee. 2020. Topical-
     izer: reframing core concepts in machine learning visualization by co-designing for interpretivist scholarship. Hu-
     man–Computer Interaction 35, 5-6 (Nov. 2020), 452–480. https://doi.org/10.1080/07370024.2020.1734460 Publisher:
     Taylor & Francis _eprint: https://doi.org/10.1080/07370024.2020.1734460.
 [6] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. 2006. Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative Research in Psychology
     3, 2 (Jan. 2006), 77–101. https://doi.org/10.1191/1478088706qp063oa
 [7] Jed R. Brubaker and Gillian R. Hayes. 2011. "We will never forget you [online]": an empirical investigation of post-
     mortem MySpace comments. In Proceedings of the ACM 2011 conference on Computer supported cooperative work -
     CSCW ’11. ACM Press, New York, New York, USA, 123–132. https://doi.org/10.1145/1958824.1958843
 [8] Carrie J. Cai, Samantha Winter, David Steiner, Lauren Wilcox, and Michael Terry. 2019. "Hello AI": Uncovering the
     Onboarding Needs of Medical Practitioners for Human-AI Collaborative Decision-Making. Proceedings of the ACM
     on Human-Computer Interaction 3, CSCW (Nov. 2019), 104:1–104:24. https://doi.org/10.1145/3359206
 [9] Kelly Caine. 2016. Local Standards for Sample Size at CHI. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human
     Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’16). Association for Computing Machinery, San Jose, California, USA, 981–992.
     https://doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858498
[10] John L. Campbell, Charles Quincy, Jordan Osserman, and Ove K. Pedersen. 2013. Coding In-depth Semistructured
     Interviews: Problems of Unitization and Intercoder Reliability and Agreement. Sociological Methods & Research 42, 3
     (Aug. 2013), 294–320. https://doi.org/10.1177/0049124113500475 Publisher: SAGE Publications Inc.
[11] Trudy Campbell. 1997. Technology, Multimedia, and Qualitative Research in Education. Journal of Research on Com-
     puting in Education 30, 2 (Dec. 1997), 122–132. https://doi.org/10.1080/08886504.1997.10782219 Publisher: Routledge
     _eprint: https://doi.org/10.1080/08886504.1997.10782219.
[12] Kathy Charmaz. 2006. Constructing Grounded Theory: A Practical Guide Through Qualitative Analysis. SAGE.
[13] Nan-Chen Chen, Margaret Drouhard, Rafal Kocielnik, Jina Suh, and Cecilia R. Aragon. 2018. Using Machine Learning
     to Support Qualitative Coding in Social Science: Shifting the Focus to Ambiguity. ACM Transactions on Interactive
     Intelligent Systems 8, 2 (June 2018), 9:1–9:20. https://doi.org/10.1145/3185515
[14] John W. Creswell. 2013. Qualitative Inquiry and Research Design: Choosing Among Five Approaches. SAGE.
[15] Jill P. Dimond, Casey Fiesler, Betsy DiSalvo, Jon Pelc, and Amy S. Bruckman. 2012. Qualitative data collection tech-
     nologies: a comparison of instant messaging, email, and phone. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM international conference
     on Supporting group work (GROUP ’12). Association for Computing Machinery, Sanibel Island, Florida, USA, 277–280.
     https://doi.org/10.1145/2389176.2389218
[16] Paul Dourish. 2014. Reading and Interpreting Ethnography. In Ways of Knowing in HCI, Judith S. Olson and Wendy A.
     Kellogg (Eds.). Springer, New York, NY, 1–23. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4939-0378-8_1
[17] Robert Elliott, Constance T. Fischer, and David L. Rennie. 1999. Evolving guidelines for publication of qualita-
     tive research studies in psychology and related ﬁelds. British Journal of Clinical Psychology 38, 3 (1999), 215–229.
     https://doi.org/10.1348/014466599162782 _eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1348/014466599162782.
[18] Casey Fiesler, Jed R. Brubaker, Andrea Forte, Shion Guha, Nora McDonald, and Michael Muller. 2019. Qualitative
     Methods for CSCW: Challenges and Opportunities. In Conference Companion Publication of the 2019 on Computer
     Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing (CSCW ’19). Association for Computing Machinery, Austin, TX,
     USA, 455–460. https://doi.org/10.1145/3311957.3359428


                         Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 5, No. CSCW1, Article 94. Publication date: April 2021.
94:22                                                                                            Jialun Aaron Jiang et al.


[19] Katie Z. Gach and Jed R. Brubaker. 2020. Experiences of Trust in Postmortem Proﬁle Management. ACM Transactions
     on Social Computing 3, 1 (Feb. 2020), 2:1–2:26. https://doi.org/10.1145/3365525
[20] Eric Gilbert and Karrie Karahalios. 2019. CSCW 2019 Welcome Remarks.
[21] Barney G. Glaser. 1965. The Constant Comparative Method of Qualitative Analysis. Social Problems 12, 4 (1965), 436–
     445. https://doi.org/10.2307/798843 Publisher: [Oxford University Press, Society for the Study of Social Problems].
[22] Barney G. Glaser and Anselm L. Strauss. 1967. The Discovery of Grounded Theory: Strategies for Qualitative Research.
     Aldine.
[23] Nahid Golafshani. 2003. Understanding Reliability and Validity in Qualitative Research. The Qualitative Report 8, 4
     (Dec. 2003), 597–606. https://nsuworks.nova.edu/tqr/vol8/iss4/6
[24] Eric Horvitz. 1999. Principles of mixed-initiative user interfaces. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Hu-
     man Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’99). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 159–166.
     https://doi.org/10.1145/302979.303030
[25] Bran Knowles, Mark Rounceﬁeld, Mike Harding, Nigel Davies, Lynne Blair, James Hannon, John Walden, and Ding
     Wang. 2015. Models and Patterns of Trust. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooper-
     ative Work & Social Computing (CSCW ’15). Association for Computing Machinery, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 328–338.
     https://doi.org/10.1145/2675133.2675154
[26] Klaus Krippendorﬀ. 2004. Content Analysis: An Introduction to Its Methodology. SAGE.
[27] Brian Lubars and Chenhao Tan. 2019. Ask not what AI can do, but what AI should do: Towards a frame-
     work of task delegability. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32, H. Wallach, H. Larochelle,
     A. Beygelzimer, F. d\textquotesingle Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Garnett (Eds.). Curran Associates, Inc., 57–67.
     http://papers.nips.cc/paper/8301-ask-not-what-ai-can-do-but-what-ai-should-do-towards-a-framework-of-task-delegability.pdf
[28] Maximilian Mackeprang, Claudia Müller-Birn, and Maximilian Timo Stauss. 2019. Discovering the Sweet Spot of
     Human-Computer Conﬁgurations: A Case Study in Information Extraction. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-
     Computer Interaction 3, CSCW (Nov. 2019), 195:1–195:30. https://doi.org/10.1145/3359297
[29] Kathleen M. MacQueen, Eleanor McLellan, Kelly Kay, and Bobby Milstein. 1998. Codebook Development for Team-
     Based Qualitative Analysis. CAM Journal (June 1998). https://doi.org/10.1177/1525822X980100020301 Publisher:
     Sage PublicationsSage CA: Los Angeles, CA.
[30] Carmel Maher, Mark Hadﬁeld, Maggie Hutchings, and Adam de Eyto. 2018. Ensuring Rigor in Qualitative Data Anal-
     ysis: A Design Research Approach to Coding Combining NVivo With Traditional Material Methods. International
     Journal of Qualitative Methods 17, 1 (Dec. 2018), 1609406918786362. https://doi.org/10.1177/1609406918786362 Pub-
     lisher: SAGE Publications Inc.
[31] Megh Marathe and Kentaro Toyama. 2018. Semi-Automated Coding for Qualitative Research: A User-Centered In-
     quiry and Initial Prototypes. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI
     ’18). Association for Computing Machinery, Montreal QC, Canada, 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3173922
[32] Nora McDonald, Sarita Schoenebeck, and Andrea Forte. 2019. Reliability and Inter-rater Reliability in Qualitative
     Research: Norms and Guidelines for CSCW and HCI Practice. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction
     3, CSCW (Nov. 2019), 72:1–72:23. https://doi.org/10.1145/3359174
[33] Michael Muller, Shion Guha, Eric P.S. Baumer, David Mimno, and N. Sadat Shami. 2016. Machine Learning and
     Grounded Theory Method: Convergence, Divergence, and Combination. In Proceedings of the 19th International Con-
     ference on Supporting Group Work (GROUP ’16). Association for Computing Machinery, Sanibel Island, Florida, USA,
     3–8. https://doi.org/10.1145/2957276.2957280
[34] R. Parasuraman, T.B. Sheridan, and C.D. Wickens. 2000. A model for types and levels of human interaction with
     automation. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics - Part A: Systems and Humans 30, 3 (May 2000), 286–
     297. https://doi.org/10.1109/3468.844354 Conference Name: IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics -
     Part A: Systems and Humans.
[35] Pablo Paredes, Ana Ruﬁno Ferreira, Cory Schillaci, Gene Yoo, Pierre Karashchuk, Dennis Xing, Coye Cheshire, and
     John Canny. 2017. Inquire: Large-scale Early Insight Discovery for Qualitative Research. In Proceedings of the 2017
     ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing (CSCW ’17). Association for Com-
     puting Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1562–1575. https://doi.org/10.1145/2998181.2998363
[36] Oliver C. Robinson. 2014. Sampling in Interview-Based Qualitative Research: A Theoretical and Practical Guide.
     Qualitative Research in Psychology 11, 1 (Jan. 2014), 25–41. https://doi.org/10.1080/14780887.2013.801543 Publisher:
     Routledge _eprint: https://doi.org/10.1080/14780887.2013.801543.
[37] Gemma Ryan. 2018. Introduction to positivism, interpretivism and critical theory. Nurse Researcher 25, 4 (March
     2018), 41–49. https://doi.org/10.7748/nr.2018.e1466
[38] Johnny Saldaña. 2009. The Coding Manual for Qualitative Researchers. SAGE Publications, Incorporated.
[39] Anselm Strauss and Juliet M. Corbin. 1997. Grounded Theory in Practice. SAGE.



Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 5, No. CSCW1, Article 94. Publication date: April 2021.
Supporting Serendipity                                                                                             94:23


[40] Dakuo Wang, Justin D. Weisz, Michael Muller, Parikshit Ram, Werner Geyer, Casey Dugan, Yla Tausczik, Horst
     Samulowitz, and Alexander Gray. 2019. Human-AI Collaboration in Data Science: Exploring Data Scientists’ Percep-
     tions of Automated AI. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 3, CSCW (Nov. 2019), 211:1–211:24.
     https://doi.org/10.1145/3359313
[41] Gregor Wiedemann. 2013.         Opening up to Big Data: Computer-Assisted Analysis of Textual Data in So-
     cial Sciences.      Forum Qualitative Sozialforschung / Forum: Qualitative Social Research 14, 2 (May 2013).
     https://doi.org/10.17169/fqs-14.2.1949 Number: 2.
[42] Jasy Liew Suet Yan, Nancy McCracken, Shichun Zhou, and Kevin Crowston. 2014. Optimizing Features in Active
     Machine Learning for Complex Qualitative Content Analysis. In Proceedings of the ACL 2014 Workshop on Language
     Technologies and Computational Social Science. Association for Computational Linguistics, Baltimore, MD, USA, 44–48.
     https://doi.org/10.3115/v1/W14-2513
[43] Qian Yang, Aaron Steinfeld, and John Zimmerman. 2019. Unremarkable AI: Fitting Intelligent Decision Sup-
     port into Critical, Clinical Decision-Making Processes. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human
     Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’19). Association for Computing Machinery, Glasgow, Scotland Uk, 1–11.
     https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300468
[44] Zijian Zhang, Jaspreet Singh, Ujwal Gadiraju, and Avishek Anand. 2019. Dissonance Between Human and Ma-
     chine Understanding. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 3, CSCW (Nov. 2019), 56:1–56:23.
     https://doi.org/10.1145/3359158

Received June 2020; revised October 2020; accepted December 2020




                         Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., Vol. 5, No. CSCW1, Article 94. Publication date: April 2021.
