Performing an inductive Thematic Analysis of semi-structured interviews
                    with a Large Language Model
               An exploration and provocation on the limits of the approach


               Stefano De Paoli – Abertay University – s.depaoli@abertay.ac.uk
Please note that the paper has been published in Social Sciences Computer Review and is
available in Open Access here:
https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/epub/10.1177/08944393231220483
The script for initial coding is available here: https://github.com/sdptn/TA_LLM
Feel free to contact me if you want to discuss the approach.



Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) have emerged as powerful generative Artificial Intelligence solutions. This paper
presents results and reflections of an experiment done with the LLM GPT 3.5-Turbo to perform an inductive
Thematic Analysis (TA). Previous research has worked on conducting deductive analysis. Thematic Analysis is a
qualitative method for analysis commonly used in social sciences and it is based on interpretations by the human
analyst(s) and the identification of explicit and latent meanings in qualitative data. The paper presents the
motivations for attempting this analysis, it reflects on how the six phases to a TA proposed by Braun and Clarke
can partially be reproduced with the LLM and it reflects on what are the model’s outputs. The paper uses two
datasets of open access semi-structured interviews, previously analysed by other researchers. The first dataset
contains interviews with videogame players, the second is a dataset of interviews with lecturers teaching data
science in a University. This paper used the analyses previously conducted on these datasets to compare with the
results produced by the LLM. The results show that the model can infer most of the main themes from previous
research. This shows that using LLMs to perform an inductive TA is viable and offers a good degree of validity.
The discussion offers some recommendations for working with LLMs in qualitative analysis.


Keywords: Large Language Models, Thematic Analysis, Qualitative Research, Human-AI Collaboration



    1. Introduction
The problem investigated in this paper is whether we can use the Large Language Model (LLM) GPT (3.5-Turbo),
to perform an inductive Thematic Analysis (TA) of semi-structured interviews. This investigation is exploratory
and does not seek to establish formal procedures for doing a TA with LLMs. I am interested in learning something
either about the about the method or about how LLMs can be used in qualitative analysis. LLMs are generative
Artificial Intelligences (AI), working with natural language processing (NLP), trained on massive amounts of
textual data. They use advanced machine-learning neural networks with the capacity to learn from data and
improvise responses. LLMs can produce meaningful conversation and interactions with humans when prompted
and solve tasks. LLMs do not produce human level thinking, for example they do not possess an idea of the world
like humans do (Hao et al., 2023). For Floridi (2023, p. 14) LLMs: “can do statistically—that is, working on the
formal structure, and not on the meaning of the texts they process—what we do semantically“. LLMs operate on
the language not with an understanding of its meaning like humans, but from a structural perspective, where words
are seen in their numerical representation and sentences are built using structural and probabilistic components of
language.
This leads to the provocative nature of my inquiry, which relates to the analysis social scientists operate within
qualitative research, considered inductive, interpretative as opposed to the positivist approach focused on deduction
or logic. The father of Sociology Max Weber, for example noted that the goal of social scientists is to interpret the
meaning of social action for providing a casual explanation. This interpretation is subjective, and the analysts use
their own sensibilities and knowledge. For example, TA focuses on the identification of “patterns of meaning”:
themes in data. Braun & Clarke (2006, p. 81 – emphasis added) argued that TA: “can be an essentialist or realist
method, which reports experiences, meanings and the reality of participants, or it can be a constructionist
method, which examines the ways in which events, realities, meanings, experiences and so on are the effects of a
range of discourses operating within society”. Qualitative analysis thus works on meanings and interpretation,
whereas LLMs work on structural and probabilistic elements of language.
TA is a flexible approach to qualitative analysis and lends itself to experimentation with LLMs. Braun & Clarke
(2006) famously stipulated that researchers should operate six, inter-related phases: “(1) familiarising yourself with
your data; (2) generating initial codes; (3) searching for themes; (4) reviewing themes; (5) defining and naming
themes; (6) producing the report”. Because of this step-by-step process, I believe it is possible to work separately
on each phase and see if an LLM can perform an inductive TA. Inductive TA is created without having pre-
determined codes and themes: the analysts ground the codes strictly to the data and do not fit the data into any pre-
existing frame (Nowell et al., 2017). The inductiveis different and separate from a deductive approach, where
analysts attribute data extracts to a pre-defined grid of analysis. Said otherwise, the two terms describe very different
relations between theory/concepts and data: in the deductive the analysts rely on a theoretical framework or defined
categories to interpret the data, whereas in the inductive approach the analysts ignore the theory and openly explore
themes or concepts (see for a discussion Kennedy & Thornberg, 2018). Developing an inductive approach with an
LLM is an interesting problem, because it puts the LLM in the position to creatively derive codes/themes directly
from the data, without any pre-defined analytical frame.



    2. Literature Review
There has been significant hype around LLMs such as ChatGPT including in research and academia. Data analysis
is a potential area of application for LLMs, and literature often relates to the field of data science (Hassani and
Silva, 2023). For example, ChatGPT has been used for exploratory data analysis (Sanmarchi et al. 2023),
visualization or preprocessing (Kurniadi et al., 2023). The impact on research (van Dis et al., 2023) and research
priorities are also discussed in publications, including in healthcare (Sallam, 2023), financial research (Dowling and
Lucey, 2023), or ethics of publishing (Lund et al., 2023b) to mention few examples. Others focused on the
application of ChatGPT such as in marketing research (Peres et al., 2023), or education (Rahman, & Watanobe,
2023). There already are literature reviews for example in education (Lo, 2023), healthcare (Sallam, 2023), or
business (George, 2023). Readers can consult these for an overview, but the literature field is in constant evolution.
Some similarities could be drawn between the use of LLMs and previous work using “traditional”
supervised/unsupervised machine-learning for qualitative analysis such as qualitative coding (e.g. Renz, 2018),
grounded theory (Nelson, 2020), content analysis (see e.g. Renz et al., 2018), or TA (Gauthier & Wallace, 2022) )
at least insofar as activities related to analysis are delegated to algorithms. In a review of the gaps in Computational
Text Analysis Methods especially in the social sciences, Baden et al. (2016) noticed that there has been primacy of
technological solutions over reflecting on the validity of using computational resources for analysis, and that at the
same time the application of computational resources to text analysis tends to be narrow, focusing on a single aspect
such as the sentiment. There has been a limited uptake of machine-learning in qualitative analysis, also because of
social scientists’ lack of computing skills.
We should consider that using LLMs for qualitative analysis is a subject in its statu nascendi, in the state of being
born. Therefore, there is very limited literature available. To the author's knowledge there are only two scientific
papers on the use of LLMs for qualitative data analysis (Xiao et al., 2023; Gao et al. 2023). An additional online
post is also worth discussing (Schiavone et al., 2023), due to its findings. The first two contributions also place
emphasis on the labor-intensive process of qualitative coding of large datasets. Both papers promote the use of
LLMs to automate the qualitative coding process. Neither engages substantially with the problem of ‘interpretation’
which is part of qualitative analysis. Xiao et al. (2023) focus on two aspects: the agreement of LLMs deductive
coding with coding done by human analysts, and how the design of the prompt (i.e. what is asked to the LLM)
impacts the analysis. They deploy LLMs for deductive coding, which in their paper means assigning predefined
labels to text. They found that "it is feasible to use GPT-3 with an expert-developed codebook for deductive coding.”
(p. 76) and that a “codebook-centered design performs better than the example centered designs” (p. 77), where the
prompt is based on the actual codes, rather than on examples of using the codebook. They use Cohen’s Kappa to
measure the inter-reliability between the analysist and the model, however this measure can only be used when
different analysts use the same codes on the same material. Gao et al. (2023) focus on the creation of a support tool
for collaborative coding. They connect the use of LLM to social sciences and follow the approach proposed by
Richards and Hempill (2018), focusing on "open coding", "iterative discussion", and "codebook development". The
research is also supported by user evaluation, which contributes to establishing some agreement across the scientific
community. Gao et al. (2023) suggest relevant implications, including the use of LLMs as helpers more than as
replacement of analysts, the use of the results for discussion amongst the research team and as basis for refinement.
These suggestions fall in the Human-AI collaboration in qualitative analysis suggested by Jiang et al. (2021). Lastly,
although not a scientific paper, the online post by Schiavone et al. (2023) deserves mention as it reports the results
of a TA conducted on a small set of online user comments. The authors operated a TA both manually and then with
ChatGPT to assess the reciprocal inter-reliability of human-to-human and human-to-LLM showing that the Cohen’s
Kappa metric appears largely similar in both cases (around circa 0.7).
In summary, Xiao et al. (2023) and Gao et al. (2023) offer interesting insights, e.g. the role of prompts in relation
to the outputs, or the use of models as support of analysist. I propose, however, a different approach. Firstly, to
work on an inductive TA process and understand if something satisfactory can be extracted from the model.
Secondly, I come from a perspective of social sciences and my goal is not building tools, but to reflect on the
methodological aspects of doing TA with LLMs. Thirdly, I propose working on qualitative interviews, whereas
they worked with secondary data.



    3. Design of the experiment and LLM use
Using existing open access semi-structured interviews previously analysed by other researchers, I will attempt at
re-analysing the data with the LLM (GPT3.5-Turbo) to see what output it generates, in terms of codes and themes.
I will then compare these themes with the original analysis to reflect on whether a LLM TA has some validity. The
operationalisation of codes and themes I use follows exactly Braun and Clarke (2006) own definitions (see later).
For the comparison, I will assess if the model can generate similar names for themes and if the themes descriptions
are similar or match those of the original researchers. I will only consider phases 1-5 of a TA. Phase 6 relates to
writing up the results, and as there is discussion on using LLMs for writing academic publications, this will not be
attempted here.
I will use two datasets of semi-structured interviews, selected because of the following: 1) they are open access with
creative commons licenses; 2) because of this, they are anonymised and do not raise specific ethical concerns; 3)
we have documents reporting the analysis and can draw a comparison; 4) they are contained in size, and this is
beneficial since GPT has inherent limits related with text processing.
The first dataset is the player interviews (n=13, young people between 18-26 years of age) from the project gaming-
horizon, an EU funded “project that explored the role of video games in culture, economy and education”1. Players
were one of the stakeholders' groups of the project alongside e.g. educators or policymakers. The dataset is available
from zenodo (Perrotta et al., 2018). We will call this the ‘gaming’ dataset. There is an associated report with the
results of a TA (Persico et al., 2017a), and a literature review (Persico et al., 2017b) where the analysis framework
is defined. Albeit the analysis was done with a deductive approach, using the results from the reports it will be
possible to identify whether there are similarities or differences with what GPT can produce inductively. The second
dataset (Curty et al. 2022) is related with the project “Teaching undergraduates with quantitative data in the social
sciences at University of California Santa Barbara”, it comprises 10 interviews with instructors/lecturers “who use
quantitative data to teach undergraduate courses” at the University. We will call this the ‘teaching’ dataset. There s
an associated report (Curty et al. 2021), with the results of inductive coding.


3.1 API, Prompt and Response
The experimentation was conducted with the OpenAI API, which allows to connect to GPT3.5-turbo
(https://platform.openai.com/docs/introduction/key-concepts) via python scripts (a script is a small computer
program for a computer to perform). In the following, the python scripts will not be discussed in detail, as they are
doing basic operations on the data. However, we will discuss in detail the prompts, with the instructions given to
the LLM. We must note also that the model is a black-boked AI and we do not know what operation it does when
requested to perform a prompt, due to the complexity of the underlying algorithms (see e.g. Rai, 2020 for a
discussion on black-boxed AI), and the proprietary nature of the software. What we know, as users, is that we give
the model a textual input (prompt), and we will receive a textual output (response). A prompt is the set of textual
instructions given to the model, whereas the response is the model’s output based on its ‘interpretation’ of the
prompt. Prompting is when “a pre-trained language model is given a prompt (e.g. a natural language instruction) of
a task and completes the response without any further training or gradient updates to its parameters.” (Wei et al.,
2022, p. 3). For example, in ChatGPT (https://chat.openai.com/), one example is as in Figure 1. The user types the
prompt “write me the names of the 3 most important Italian poets”, and the model responds. We do not know what
the model does with our prompt, but we see its output and can assess it. This is exemplified in Figure 2.




                                   Figure 1 – Prompt-response example from ChatGPT



1 https://www.gaminghorizons.eu/
                           Figure 2 – LLM prompting and response, simplified workflow
The API works in a similar way, but it is possible to use this in conjunction with a scripting language and this allows
additional data manipulations and parsing. Using the API, the script-code of the previous example will look like the
one in Figure 3.




                Figure 3 – Python script, prompt and response replicating the example of Figure 1
The script requires importing the OpenAI library ([1]) which allows one to connect to the LLM API. The connection
requires a secret key (KEY) to access the model ([2]). The function get_completion ([3]) calls the model (gpt-3.5-
turbo) to work on the prompt (in [4]) and returns a response (last two lines in [4]). This function and the prompt are
sufficient for using the API, and the response from the LLM in figure 3 is the same as in figure 1. The building of
prompts is a critical moment of using the model, as the user keeps refining them to produce the desired output (Zhou
et al., 2022). Indeed, even slight variations in the prompt wording may yield different results, due to the probabilistic
nature of LLMs responses. The concept “prompt engineering” (see e.g. Wei et al., 2022), encapsulates the testing
needed to provide a clear set of instructions to the model. Also note the parameter temperature (T) within the
function get_completion (in [3]), which relates with the ‘randomness’ and ‘creativity’ of the model. The temperature
accepts values between 0 and 2. This implies that by running the same prompt with temperature at 0 (no-
randomness-deterministic) the model should reproduce the same output. Instead, higher values will increase
response variability. For example, the above prompt with T at 1, gave: Dante Alighieri, Francesco Petrarca and
Ludovico Ariosto. Running this again might lead to further different responses.
Lastly, there is an important difference between the webchat and the API, in the second case it is possible to have
the LLM do operations responding to the prompt on textual material, such as interviews or other natural documents.
Figure 4 exemplifies this point: with the API it is possible to pass the data we want to analyse to the LLM, and have
the model perform a task.




                               Figure 4 - Workflow with data in the prompt via API


3.2 Tokens and memory
LLMs have a limit related to how many tokens they can process at any one time. A token roughly equates to one
word. At the time of writing the limit for GPT3.5-Turbo is 4097 tokens including both the prompt and response.
This limit impacts text processing. For instance, the interviews from the ‘gaming’ dataset are between 5000 to 9000
words. Therefore, interviews must be divided into smaller chunks to be processed one at a time. We have also to
consider that interviews will need to be part of the prompt, and therefore chunks must be relatively small to allow
the LLM to have enough tokens to produce the response.
I wrote a script to divide the datasets into chunks of roughly 2500 tokens. This number has been selected after
experimenting with higher values (e.g. 3000) which would occasionally reach the max tokens limit. With a chunking
at around 2500 tokens the ‘gaming’ dataset resulted in 56 chunks and the ‘teaching’ dataset in 35 chunks. The
chunks have been stored in a csv file with the structure of Figure 5.




                            Figure 5 – Structure of the CSV file containing the chunks
FileName is the name of the chunk,e.g. part_0_Play_1 is the first chunk of the Play_1 interview. Then there is the
text of the chunk (Interview_chunk) and a column with the tokens number.
Another important aspect of the LLM is that it does not have memory, i.e. it does not remember the content of past
prompts, and if these are relevant for later operations, then these will need to be passed to the model again as
prompts. This is a limit and the LLM can work only one chunk at a time. Therefore, for this experimentation I
assumed that the model would not ‘remember’ previous prompts.



    4. Results and Observations
In this section I present the analysis done on the datasets. The methodological components of the research are
presented alongside the analysis results, since the objective is to establish whether we can perform something
looking like a TA with an LLM (i.e. the methods are also the results). This follows the workflow described in Figure
6. In each phase different prompts are used, and these will be detailed in the following pages. The TA is done
inductively: no preexisting coding framework orexamples are given to the model, and all the codes and the
subsequent themes, are entirely grounded in the LLM data ‘interpretation’.




                              Figure 6 – Simplified workflow for a TA with an LLM
Phase 1: familiarising with the data
This phase requires the researcher(s) to familiarise with the data, by e.g. transcribing interviews or reading
transcripts. This is done to begin formulating insights into what the data is about. I believe that this familiarisation
now cannot be performed with e.g. GPT, due to the tokens and memory limits. It may be possible with more
powerful models to have the model read all the material and ‘familiarise’ with its contents. Nonetheless in this phase
it is important for the researcher(s) to prepare the data for processing.
Due to the limit of tokens, it is useful to clean the data before the analysis. For example, upon inspection of the
‘gaming’ interviews, the first opening page of the transcripts was about e.g. setting up the recording. For example,
part of the opening of most interviews was as follows:
        First of all, you do know you are audio recorded?

        Yeah.

        Great. Can you see in the screen I’m sharing?

        Yeah.

        Great. I will explain to you how this interview works and what we are interested in....
This is not text which has relevance for the analysis and was trimmed to reduce the number of tokens. This clean-
up was done manually, removing irrelevant text at the beginning or at the end (e.g. final salutation). After this, the
chunking operation previously described (see Figure 5) can be done. Additionally, it may be useful to change the
format of the data. For example, the ‘gaming’ interviews were .rtf files and the ‘teaching’ were pdfs. Everything
was saved as text files (.txt) for processing.


Phase 2: generating initial codes
The second phase of a TA is the generation of codes. For Braun & Clarke (2006), codes "identify a feature of the
data (semantic content or latent) that appears interesting to the analyst” (p. 88). The analysts identify features of
interest in the data that may have some meaning and about the meaning the respondents attribute to e.g. things,
social relations, events under investigation. I asked the model to inductively infer ‘codes’ from the data, without
any coding scheme using the prompt in Figure 7. In the prompt, the word ‘themes’ is used instead of ‘codes’ as it
works better within the prompt. However, for clarity here we are identifying the initial ‘codes’.




                                Figure 7– Prompt to infer initial codes (Prompt 1)


The csv file with the interview chunks had been parsed earlier in a dataframe - df (a powerful data structure in
python). The prompt is embedded in a “for cycle” running for the entire length (range(l)) of the dataframe (i.e. for
the number of chunks). The script reads each chunk one at a time from the dataframe (df.iloc[i][‘Interview_chunk’])
and puts it in the variable ‘text’ ({text}) which is inside the prompt (i.e. Figure 4 workflow).
The prompt asks the model (using the get_completion function,) to:
    1.   Identify 3 of the most relevant codes for each chunk ({text})
    2.   Provide a 3 words name to each code
    3.   Provide a 4 lines description of the code
    4.   Store one meaningful quote for each code
    5.   Format each set of 3 codes, descriptions and quotes as a json fileThe number of codes inferred from each
         chunk is limited to 3, because in subsequent phases some of the output of this operation will need to be
         used in prompts, and this impacts the maximum number of tokens. When I asked the generation of 4
         codes, the system did reach the tokens limit in Phase 3.
This prompt (Figure 7) produced 161 codes from the ‘gaming’ dataset and 101 from the ‘teaching’ dataset. These
were stored in a csv file with the structure of Figure 8. Each code has a name, a description and a quote.




                        Figure 8 – Structure of the csv file with the codes inferred (excerpt)


Before considering the next phase, it is important to note that since the model goes through each chunk separately,
it is likely that there will be repeated codes. This repetition would happen rarely when the analysis is done by a
human, since if a portion of interview reminds the analyst about an already created code, then this is coded
accordingly. Therefore, it is essential to reduce the codebook, by merging very similar codes, descriptions and
quotes. For the ‘gaming’ dataset I also reduced the length of descriptions, because of the tokens limit. For the
reduction of codes, I used the prompt in Figure 9.




                            Figure 9 – Prompt for reducing duplicate codes (Prompt 2)


It took several iterations to engineer this prompt, and I worked initially on making the model trying to identify
similarity (e.g. “Determine if there are items which are very similar”). The response, however, was inconsistent. I
would often get only the list of similar codes, but not unique codes. The output in the json file was also sometimes
not well formatted. This is an example of how much prompt construction impacts the output quality. Note the
prompt uses the terms items and topics, for clarity with the model. Using ‘items’ and ‘topics’ allowed me to
distinguish between the content and the position of each topic in the list of topics/codes. The list of topics includes
the code name, its description and the index (i.e. the dataframe row number). This prompt reduced the ‘gaming’
codebook from 161 to 89, and from 101 to 63 for the ‘teaching’ codebook.
During this reduction, I found that the model would sometimes get hallucinated and generate new code names out
of the existing ones. Hallucination is a concept in machine-learning where the system produces a response which is
not justified by the input. The prompt in itself also was not enough to guarantee consistency in the reduction of the
duplicated codes. In experimenting with the prompt, I found that passing together with the code name, also the
dataframe index would remove the hallucination. This was done by merging strings, where each topic in the list is
as follows: ‘code name’: ‘index’ ‘description’.


Phase 3: searching for themes
In this phase the focus moves toward the identification of themes - patterns encapsulating significant aspects of the
data - where codes are grouped and sorted. Whilst this phase should remain generally open, I asked the model to
generate a roughly equivalent number of themes to those produced by the original researchers, in order to perform
a comparison later.
The original analysis of the ‘gaming’ dataset is presented in two project reports (Persico et al. 2017a and 2017b)
and the specific themes will be presented later when an interpretation of the results will be provided. For now, it
suffices to say that the researchers had 10 themes, and one of these themes also had 3 sub-themes. Therefore, using
the 89 codes from Phase 2 I asked the model to generate 11 themes (a number between 10 and 13), using the prompt
in Figure 10, where the list of topics is a list containing the name of the codes and the associated description (i.e.
each topic has this format ‘code’: ‘description’). Quotes were not included because of the tokens limit.




                       Figure 10 – The prompt used to infer themes inductively (Prompt 3)


The list of themes (called groups due to the prompt) with their description as provided by the model (with no
changes or alterations made by the researcher) is presented in Table 1.
 Nr.    Theme              Description
 1      Gaming and         This group includes topics related to the use of video games for education and
        Education          learning, including the benefits and challenges of using games for teaching, the
                           importance of creating education-based games, and the potential of gamification in
                           education.
 2      Ethics in          This group includes topics related to ethical issues in gaming, such as violence,
        Gaming             diversity, monetization, piracy, and inclusion. It also includes discussions on the
                           responsibility of developers and publishers to balance creative expression with ethical
                           considerations.
 3      Monetization       This group includes topics related to how games make money, including free-to-play
        in Gaming          with in-game purchases, paid games, and pay-to-win models. It also includes
                         discussions on the ethical implications of micro-transactions and gambling-like
                         systems.
 4     Video Games       This group includes topics related to the growing acceptance of video games as an
       as Art            artistic medium, citing examples of games that are considered high art. It also
                         includes discussions on the combination of traditional art forms and gameplay.
 5     Game              This group includes topics related to game development, including advice for
       Development       developers, the importance of good management and communication, and the role of
                         innovation in creating immersive experiences.
 6     Representation This group includes topics related to representation in gaming, including diversity in
       in Gaming         race and gender, the importance of relatable characters, and the progress that has been
                         made in the industry.
 7     Mobile            This group includes topics related to mobile gaming, including its accessibility and
       Gaming            oversaturation in the market.
 8     Esports           This group includes topics related to esports, including its benefits, the importance of
                         physical and mental health, and the need for moderation and balance.
 9     Gamification      This group includes topics related to gamification, including its use for education and
                         productivity, the need for entertainment to motivate people, and the potential for
                         complicity in neoliberal capitalism.
 10    Physical Health This group includes topics related to the impact of gaming on physical health,
       and Gaming        including the potential for reduced physical activity and the benefits and drawbacks
                         of using games for physical rehabilitation.
 11    Gaming            This group includes topics related to gaming communities, including their inclusivity
       Communities       and toxicity levels, the significance of social interactions in gameplay, and tips for
                         positive game interaction.
Table 1 – Themes inferred by the model, ‘gaming’ dataset
The analysis of the ‘teaching’ dataset had been done with an inductive approach, which is presented in the project
report (Curty et al., 2021). The report had 5 high-level themes, and 3 sub-themes for one theme. Therefore, using
the 63 codes I asked the model to generate 7 themes (a number between 5 and 8) with the same prompt. The resulting
themes are presented in Table 2.


 Nr.    Theme             Description
 1      Teaching Data     This group includes topics related to teaching students how to analyze and interpret
        Analysis and      data, including identifying good and bad graphs, understanding statistical knowledge,
        Interpretation    and teaching critical thinking about data.
 2      Mentoring and     This group includes topics related to mentoring young students and making a
        Diversifying      difference in diversifying the field of data analysis.
        the Field
 3      Teaching GIS      This group includes topics related to teaching GIS software and geospatial data,
        and Geospatial    including challenges in teaching and the practical use of the software.
        Data
 4      Collaborative     This group includes topics related to the benefits of collaborative learning and
        Learning and      interpersonal interaction in acquiring quantitative skills.
        Interpersonal
        Interaction
 5      Teaching          This group focuses on teaching research methods and the challenges of accessing and
        Research          using data. The group emphasizes the importance of technical and statistical skills in
        Methods           survey research exercises.
 6     Teaching          Group related to teaching students programming and technical skills, including the
       Programming       lack of programming classes available to non-computer science majors and the need
       and Technical     for a quantitative social science minor or data sciences program.
       Skills
 7     External          Group related to the lack of external support and resources for teaching with data,
       Support and       including the need for training opportunities and a centralized resource for
       Resources for     instructors.
       Teaching with
       Data
Table 2 – Themes inferred by the model. ‘teaching’ dataset


Phase 4: reviewing themes
For Braun & Clarke (2006) this phase requires revising themes from Phase 3 and re-organise the analysis. For
example, some themes may fit better as sub-themes, others are not consistent or homogeneous. This phase is
probably much more strongly reliant on human interpretation than the previous two. Nonetheless, I believe it is
possible to attempt to confirm which themes seem valid, rather than e.g. sub-themes or just codes or see if themes
were overlooked. To approach this, I first re-built the full codebook composed of themes and underlying codes, the
description of each code and all the associated quotes. An example from the ‘gaming’ analysis is presented in Table
3 (with just the theme and the codes).
 Theme Example                Gaming and Education
           1                  Problem Solving
           2                  Educational Potential
           3                  Success Metrics
 Codes
           4                  Teaching through games
           5                  Gender and Diversity in eSports2
           6                  Practical Obligation of Games
           7                  Off-the-shelf games
           8                  Games in Education
Table 3 – Example of full theme and underlying codes
I propose that one way for operating this phase is to work with the temperature parameter, increasing the creativity
of the LLM. Increasing the temperature in the python function get_completion (Figure 3) and running again the
Prompt 3 (Figure 10) with the codes (from Phase 2), we can see if there are significant differences in the themes
produced. Table 4 presents themes with a temperature of 1 for the ‘gaming’ dataset, on three tests. The goal is to
identify consistency across themes between the ones from Phase 3 (Table 1) and the ones from Phase 4 and if there
are overlooked themes or which appear less relevant. The choice of the final themes would need to rely on the
sensibility of the human researcher. For the purposes of this paper, I have not made a specific choice in this phase
but will use the themes from both Phase 4 and Phase 3 for a comparison with the original analysis.
                             Theme names (in the order provided by the model, T=1)
 Nr     Test_1                       Test_2                             Test_3
 1      The Benefits of Gaming and   The Positive Impacts of Gaming     Using video games for learning
        Education                                                       and education

2 Although this code is about eSports, I believe the model included this code here as the description also reflects on career

paths and career choices. Alternatively, this may be an hallucination, and potentially something to review manually.
 2     Ethical Issues in Gaming           Ethical Issues in Gaming               Ethical concerns in gaming
 3     Monetization and Business          Gaming and Art                         Video games as art
       Models in Gaming
 4     Video Games as Art                 Free-to-Play and Monetization          Representations in gaming
                                          models
 5     Gaming and Age Restrictions        Gaming Industry and                    Monetization and business
                                          Development                            models in gaming
 6     Game Development and               Diversity and Representation in        The impact of gaming on physical
       Management                         Gaming                                 and mental health
 7     Gaming for Relaxation and          Gaming in Education                    Video games for recreation and
       Nurturing Experiences                                                     relaxation
 8     Immersive World-Building and       Identity in Gaming                     Video games in sports and
       Story-Driven Games                                                        eSports
 9     Diversity and Representation in    Gaming and Physical Health             Innovation and creativity in game
       Gaming                                                                    development
 10    eSports and Competitive            Esports                                Using gamification for non-
       Gaming                                                                    entertainment purposes

 11 Gaming and Physical Health         Positive Gaming Interaction               Positive aspects of gaming
Table 4 – Themes generated, ‘gaming’ dataset T=1
We can see from the three tests some consistency between Phase 3 and Phase 4 around several key themes, which
include Education, Art, Ethics, Monetisation, Esports, Physical Health, Representation among others. Based on this
limited testing we can preliminarily conclude that these just mentioned may be potentially valid themes which
represent the data. However, there also are a few other themes which might have been overlooked by the model in
Phase 3 and which appear in Phase 4, such as Mental-Health and Age Restrictions.
What is presented in Table 5, is the same operation on the ‘teaching’ dataset.
                                                    Theme names (T=1)
 Nr.    Test_1                            Test_2                                  Test_3
 1       Importance of Data Analysis      Statistical Literacy                    Teaching Approaches to Data
        and Critical Thinking                                                     Analysis
 2       Teaching Methods and              Teaching Tools                         Access to Data
        Resources
 3       Undergraduate Instruction and     Diversifying the Field                 Software and Tools for Data
        Mentoring                                                                 Analysis
 4       Graphics and Visualization        Collaboration                          Teaching with Data as a
                                                                                  Pedagogical Theme
 5      Geospatial Data                  Challenges in Teaching                   Quantitative Research Design
 6      Programming and Technical        Psychology-specific Themes               Sociology and Data Analysis
       Skills
 7      Statistical Literacy and         Practical Skills                         Geospatial Data
       Research Design
Table 5 – Themes generated for the ‘teaching’ dataset with T=1
We can see in Table 5 slightly more variation, compared to what we saw in Table 4. Entirely new themes appear
around e.g. psychology or sociology for example. I then decided for the ‘teaching’ dataset to operate on a lower
temperature at 0.5 (Table 6).
                                                 Theme names (T=0.5)
 Nr.   Test_1                           Test_2                                    Test_3
 1      Teaching Critical Thinking       Teaching Statistical Literacy            Statistical Literacy
       and Interpretation of Data
 2      Teaching with Data Sources       Teaching with Data                        Teaching Challenges
       and Tools
 3      Mentoring and Diversifying       Mentoring and Diversifying the            Diversity and Inclusion
       the Field                        Field
 4      Teaching Statistics and          Teaching GIS                              Teaching Resources
       Research Methods
 5      Teaching Geospatial Data         Teaching Research Methods                 Quantitative Methods
 6      Remote Teaching and              Challenges in Teaching with Data          Programming
       Learning
 7      Sociological Research and        Practical Data Skills in Sociology        Remote Instruction
       Data Skills
Table 6 – Themes generated for the ‘teaching’ dataset with T=0.5
With T=0.5, there is (as expected) more consistency. Some themes clearly emerge across Table 6 and Table 2, in
particular about the issue of resources, the teaching of data analysis, the teaching GIS technology among others. It
may be that T at 0.5, is acceptable to review the validity of themes in Phase 4 of TA.


Phase 5: defining and naming themes
Braun & Clarke (2006, p. 92) state that: “It is important that by the end of this phase you can clearly define what
your themes are, and what they are not. One test for this is to see whether you can describe the scope and content
of each theme in a couple of sentences.”. This probably is also a phase that requires the analyst’s capacity to
encapsulate all the previous steps as the model does not have memory of what was done. Nonetheless, I propose to
perform Phase 5 to provide the model with the list of codes names and description composing each theme and one
meaningful quote for each code (without theme and theme description) and asked with a prompt to provide a
summary of what they mean and a name. The examples I propose here are the one in Table 3, and one additional
theme, for the gaming dataset. The prompt used is presented in Figure 11, each topic of the list is the entire set of
codes for each theme, including, descriptions and one quote for each.




                       Figure 11– Prompt used to summarise each theme again (Prompt 4)




 ‘gaming’        Name                 Description
 Original        Gaming and           This group includes topics related to the use of video games for education
 (Phase 3)       Education            and learning, including the benefits and challenges of using games for
                                      teaching, the importance of creating education-based games, and the
                                      potential of gamification in education.
 Rename and      Games for            Games have the potential to teach various skills and disciplines, and can
 Summary         Education and        be used to bridge the gap between different target markets. However,
 (Phase 5)       Diversity            there is a need for more games specifically designed for educational
                                      purposes and for greater diversity and representation in the gaming
                                      industry.

 Original        Ethics in Gaming   This group includes topics related to ethical issues in gaming, such as
 (Phase 3)                          violence, diversity, monetization, piracy, and inclusion. It also includes
                                    discussions on the responsibility of developers and publishers to balance
                                    creative expression with ethical considerations.
 Rename and Ethical Issues in       Developers and publishers need to be aware of what they put in their
 Summary        Gaming              games, especially if kids are playing them, and context is important.
 (Phase 5)                          Games have a responsibility to recognize and address issues such as
                                    sexism and ethical concerns.
Table 7 – Potential renaming and two lines description, two themes as examples


We see in Table 7 that there is some slight variation in the name of the themes, and it may be possible at this stage
to operate some renaming of the themes found at Phase 3. Generally, we can see that the model can provide a
synthetic description of what each example theme means (remember the model has not seen the original name of
the theme nor the descriptions).




        6. Interpretation of the results
We can now compare the results seen in the previous pages with the analysis conducted on the ‘gaming’ and
‘teaching’ datasets by the original researchers. This will allow us to evaluate the extent to which the results of the
LLM TA are similar or different to the actual analysis. For the comparison I propose two main criteria: 1) the theme
names generated by the LLMs are very similar to the one of the original research; 2) the description of the theme
produced by the LLMs conveys a very similar meaning to that proposed by the researchers, even if the theme name
differs. Original themes and descriptions are compared then to the tables (1, 2, 4 and 6) seen in previous pages.
6.1 Gaming Dataset
The analysis of the ‘gaming’ dataset had been done using deductive coding (Persico et. Al. 2017a). There are two
sets of themes proposed, one related to ‘perspectives’ (Numbered from 1 to 4 in Table 9, including 3 sub-themes)
and one set related to ‘pre-defined questions’ used to obtain coherence in the analysis (Persico et al., 2017a). Table
9 also reports the description of each theme extrapolated (where available) from another project report, where the
thematic scheme was defined (Persico et al., 2017b). The table shows if the original theme was inferred by the
model in Phase 3, Phase 4, or as a code.
 Nr.    Theme in        Descriptions (where available from Persico             Phase 3     Phase 4     Inferred as
        original        et al. 2017b)                                          (Table 1)   (Table 4)   code(s)3 in
        research                                                                                       Phase 2

 1      Educational     “whether games can – and actually do –                 Yes
        perspective     improve learning processes, in terms of                (Theme
                        participants’ motivation and engagement                Nr. 1)
                        and/or learning outcomes.”
 2      Psychologi                                                             No          No          No
        cal             [no clear description could be identified]
        Perspective
 3      Ethical       “As games and gameful interactions of                    Yes
        perspective   various kinds continue to permeate various               (Theme
                      spheres of society – entertainment, education,           Nr. 2)
                      commerce, culture – attention is increasingly
                      turning to the ethical implications of this
                      phenomenon. […] As such, they necessarily
                      entail an ethical dimension, both as cultural
                      artefacts in themselves and as elements within
                      a social communication process. ”
 3a     Violence      “concerns have been expressed for some time              No          No          Yes
        and           about the possible impact this may have on
        Aggression players, especially among the young. […] a
                      causal link between violent video game
                      playing and increased aggressive or violent
                      behaviour could have tremendous personal
                      and social consequences.”
 3b     Monetisatio “As the platforms for playing and distributing             Yes
        n             video games have evolved and diversified                 (Theme
                      over recent decades, so have the strategies              Nr. 3)
                      adopted for monetisation games [sic]. ”
 3c     Identity      “Those voicing ethical concerns about games              Yes
                      on questions such as violence in game content            (Theme
                      and identity stereotyping/marginalization                Nr. 6)
                      often associate those concerns with an idea of
                      the prevailing games culture, particularly the
                      presumed predominance within that culture of
                      a specific demographic: young white
                      heterosexual males. […]. Researchers
                      investigating identity in video games – and
                      video gaming culture – have focused
                      particularly intensely on gender issues”
 4      Sociocultur “a [panoramic] view of the cultural, social                Yes
        al/Artistic   and technological impacts of the video games             (Theme
        perspective industry”                                                  Nr. 4)
        Themes related to the ‘overarching question’ [no clear
        description available in the report]



3 For Braun & Clarke some codes may become themes and vice versa in Phase 4. Although this cannot be done by the LLM,

their presence as code tells us that some aspects of the theme have been inferred.
 5     Mobile gaming and casual gaming                                   Yes
                                                                         (Theme
                                                                         Nr. 7)
 6     Game streaming and eSports                                        Yes
                                                                         (Theme
                                                                         Nr. 8)
 7     Innovation and game development                                   Yes
                                                                         (Theme
                                                                         Nr. 5)
 8     Game Marketing                                                    No             No               Yes

 9     Gamer communities                                                 Yes
                                                                         (Theme
                                                                         Nr. 11)
 10    Regulations                                                       No             Yes
                                                                                        (Test_1) -
                                                                                        ‘Gaming
                                                                                        and Age
                                                                                        Restriction’
Table 9 – Qualitative comparison between the original and the LLM analysisMost themes were clearly identified
by the model in Phase 3 of the TA (Table 1), with similar or almost identical names, and alike descriptions. For
those that were not identified in Phase 3, one additional was identified in Phase 4, albeit with a clearly different
name, i.e. “Gaming and Age Restriction’ instead of ‘Regulations’ (Nr. 10 in Table 9.) Two themes were not
inferred in either Phase 3 or 4, but they can be found in the list of codes, which is one of the practices suggested
by Braun & Clarke in Phase 4. One theme was not identified. These considerations deserve further scrutiny.
Violence (3a) appears only once as an LLM code ‘Violence in Games’ (Index 51), there is no mention of aggression
across the codes generated by the model. It may be that the model has overlooked this aspect, or that the prominence
given to it by the researchers was associated with their interpretation.
Marketing (8) appears in 3 LLM codes: ‘Marketing of Videogames’ (Index 39), ‘Online Marketing’ (Index 59) and
Marketing and Intent (Index 80). As there are 3 codes related to marketing, it is clear the model did not infer this as
a possible theme.
For the ‘Psychological perspective’ theme not one of the codes has the word psychology (or similar) in either the
codes’ names or descriptions. There may be ‘similar’ words, such as cognition, but they do not have much
prevalence. In Phase 4, with T=1, one theme hinted at ‘mental health’, but we cannot equate this with a
psychological perspective. The model did not infer this theme.


6.2 Teaching Dataset
The ‘teaching‘ dataset original analysis includes 5 main themes, and one theme had 3 sub-themes. In Table 10 the
5 main themes are reported from the original research. The 3 subthemes fall under theme 2 and include, ‘conceptual
understanding’, ‘critical evaluation’ and ‘working with data/tools’, they are cases of learning goals for data science.
The descriptions have been extrapolated from the report but note this is my interpretation of where the authors were
defining the themes.
 Nr.    Theme           Descriptions (from Curty et al., 2021)              Phase 3          Phase 4      Inferred
                                                                            (Table 2)        (Tables 5    as codes
                                                                                             and 6)       in Phase 2
 1     Expected         “The desire to develop critical thinking skills    Yes
       student          and advance students’ data literacy was            (Theme Nr.
       learning         consistently expressed at a high level across      1, in
       outcomes         interviews. […] ” (p. 6)                           particular
       and ways                                                            the
       students                                                            description
       engage with                                                         mentions
       data                                                                critical
                                                                           thinking)
 2     Evidence of      “Working with data and/or tools comprises          Unclear
       Learning         students’ abilities to engage directly with raw    (maybe
       Goals in         data sets, identifying and selecting existing      covered by
       Instructional    data sources, gathering, managing, and             Nr 3, 5 and
       Praxis           manipulating data, as well as operating (at        6)
                        least at a basic level) tools that can help them
                        to produce analyses and data visualizations. ”
                        (p. 8)
 3     Main                                                                Yes (Theme
       Challenges       [could not identify a clear definition, but this   Nr. 5, the
       of Teaching      encompasses ethics, data use and re-use etc.]      description
       with Data                                                           mentioned
                                                                           the
                                                                           challenges
                                                                           related to
                                                                           teaching
                                                                           methods
                                                                           and data
                                                                           use)
 4     Instructors’     “Instructional training and resource sharing       Yes
       Training and     varied among interviewees. The most common
       Resource         training that instructors expressed receiving on Nr. 7
       Sharing          teaching with data out of their graduate
                        education was through professional
                        development opportunities, […]. Otherwise,
                        the second most common method to learn the
                        techniques to teach with data is through self-
                        discovery” (p. 17)
 5     Types of         “the need for more assistance at the university Unclear      Yes
       support          level spanning from infrastructure with better- (maybe       (Test_3)
       needed           equipped and more labs to accommodate            subsumed    e.g.
                        hands-on sessions, to services and resources     in Nr. 7 by ‘Teaching
                        such as workshops on computational tools,        the model)  Resources’
                        which could be offered on an ongoing basis
                        and considering their needs and availability. ”
                        (p. 20)
Table 10 - Qualitative comparison between the original themes and the themes produced by the model
The model was perhaps less effective in inferring the themes directly by names in Phase 3 compared to the ‘gaming’
dataset, but the descriptions report similar ideas. Therefore, in some forms, 3 of the 5 themes emerged in Phase 3,
whilst a fifth one emerged in Phase 4 (on support). The theme on ‘Learning goals and praxis’ did not emerge clearly.
However, the model also inferred a variety of themes which do not appear in the original analysis. It may be that
the focus of the analysts was on the learning process and on learning goals, however aspects such as ‘mentoring’
and ‘collaboration’ were inferred consistently by the model (Phases 3-4). Which might imply the model capacity to
identify relevant themes which were not considered relevant by the analysts. In the report (Curty et al., 2021),
‘mentoring’ is never used as a word, and collaboration tends to refer (once) to the collaboration among staff.
However, the descriptions and themes built by the model clearly relate to the students’ learning.



        7. Discussion
This paper sought to experiment on whether we can use the LLM GPT3.5-Turbo to perform an inductive Thematic
Analysis of semi-structured interviews, reproducing Braun & Clarke (2006) phased approach. This paper was
written as an experiment and as a provocation, largely for social sciences as an audience, but also for computer
scientists working on this subject. I do not concur with the implicit uncritical views offered by other authors (e.g.
Xiao et al., 2023; Gao et al., 2023) which seem to take for granted that we can do qualitative analysis with LLMs,
and therefore focus on building solutions. These works follow the existing literature on using machine-learning for
this kind of analysis, which however present some critical issues as highlighted for example by Baden et al. (2016),
such as a strong focus on technical solutions over a methodological focus. However, approaches looking at testing
whether using LLMs for qualitative analysis is viable do seem important, such as the one sketched by Schiavone et
al. (2023). The work in this paper goes in this second direction. We have the evidence from this research, that it is
possible to perform a qualitative analysis with LLMs, however I would recommend that these developments are
tied with clear methodological discussions of what are the implications for social sciences. There is no denying that
the model can infer codes and themes and even identify patterns which researchers did not consider relevant and
contribute to better qualitative analysis.
The value of the experiment I conducted lies in the comparison with the results of the research of the ‘gaming’ and
‘teaching’ datasets. The model can infer some of the key themes of those research (which were identified comparing
theme names and related descriptions). This is evident in the case of the ‘gaming’ datasets where the model inferred
9 of the 13 themes, at Phase 3. Most of these themes remain also with higher Temperature (Phase 4). The model
never inferred as a theme the ‘psychological perspective’ or ‘violence and aggression’ which clearly had value for
human analysts. For the ‘teaching’ dataset three themes were inferred at Phase 3 (by looking especially at the
descriptions) and one at Phase 4. It is notable that for the ‘teaching’ dataset, the themes generated in Phase 4 present
much more variety and richness. Moreover, in this case the model has inferred themes which were not considered
by the original analysist, for example around students’ collaboration.
This paper has been written also as a provocation. There already is some, albeit limited, research approaching
qualitative analysis with LLMs. The provocation clearly stems from the idea of whether we can use an AI NLP
model to do data analysis which is normally largely reliant on the interpretation of meaning by humans. In the end
it does seem inevitable that qualitative researchers, especially in the social sciences, will have to engage with these
models in ways that can help do their work better. For this, however, we would need to establish a set of
methodological procedures which can ensure the quality and validity of the analysis. I offer some recommendations
for this below.


7.1 Recommendations
This section reflects on some potential recommendations for furthering the research on using LLMs for qualitative
analysis and connects these with previous literature.
Prompting. I agree with Xiao et al. (2023) that the generation of the right prompts is a key component for
conducting qualitative analysis with LLMs. Different prompts (even aimed at the same output) often lead to
different responses. The social sciences community may need to work on defining essential prompts that can
produce desired analysis or establishing agreed procedures for prompting. These will need to be reported in
publications as part of the methods.
Temperature. It would be important to agree how to use the Temperature. Whilst using T at 0 allows essentially
the reproduction of the results, higher values may also contribute to validity. I suggested that it may be possible to
identify the validity of themes by having the model work with e.g. T=0.5 and then verify if certain themes are
repeated across different outputs. It may be possible to use statistical techniques to identify which themes are most
frequent and possibly variance. These observations, however, will require further research.
Human-AI collaboration. I agree with Jiang et al. (2021) and Gao et al. (2023) that the likely scenario, is not one
of the human analysts being replaced by AI analysts, but one of a Human-AI collaboration. However, we also need
to establish what can be methodologically valid. We need to address how to keep the “Human-in-the-loop" about
the decision made by the model and make room for the Human to intervene to address errors/hallucinations or
increase validity. Previous research has suggested for example to use the model to generate the initial codes. I would
think it may also be possible to have the model to be a second coder, i.e. to verify the validity of the analysis of the
human analyst and suggest overlooked patterns.
Phase 1 and 6. In this experiment I argued that only the phases 2-5 of a TA are reasonably approachable with the
model. For Phase 1 Gauthier & Wallace (2022) seem to suggest that actions like e.g. data cleaning amount to
familiarising with the data. This is a good observation if we consider the process within the Human-AI collaboration,
however just looking at the model use, this phase is not covered with the data cleaning. For Phase 6, there is debate
about the use of LLMs for scientific writing (Lund et al., 2023), and its ethical implications. However, there may
be a difference between having an LLM write a paper from scratch (in place of the author) and having the model
write up a report about the analysis it has conducted.
User Research. I commend Gao et al. (2023) for having done user evaluation of the analysis with the model.
Although they have done it to evaluate their tool, it does seem important that we work with the scientific community
to assess the outputs of LLMs qualitative analyses. I would suggest that user research is not done just to assess
software usability, but also to develop the methodological debate, around questions such as: “is this analysis valid”?
“does it have the expected rigour?”.


7.1 Issues and limitations
What has been presented here requires a recognition of limits. This was just an initial experiment, and I cannot
claim it is fully comprehensive of a reproduction of an inductive TA.
Prompting. Building prompts producing the desired results has not been easy nor obvious. The response sometimes
was inconsistent. Changing the number of themes asked to be inferred produces sometimes different themes. The
results produced here are valid with the prompt used and with the proposed chunks, keeping still in mind that LLMs
produce outputs based on probabilities. The interview chunks are included as csv files with this paper (or can be
requested to the author), to allow for reproduction of results.
Ethics. I did not work with documents (e.g. book reviews), like some of the previous researchers, but with
interviews. The interviews need to be analysed by a model in the cloud. Therefore, the data needs to be fully
anonymised at the point of performing the analysis. It remains a grey area to understand the extent to which we can
use these models on newly generated interviews. For this we would need in the future to inform respondents and
obtain consent for the data to be processed by LLMs. Specific expert research will need to be done to assess all the
ethical implications of using LLMs for qualitative analysis.
Hallucination. I found that hallucinations were produced during Phase 3, and I solved the problem by passing an
index in the prompt. In one case I believe the model hallucinated with the assignation of a code to a theme. This
can be seen in Table 3 where the code ‘Gender and Diversity in eSports’ is assigned to the Education theme. I did
not correct this hallucination, as my goal is to foster discussion more than deliver solutions, but this is an important
aspect which will need to be addressed at methodological level and within the Human-AI collaboration.



References
Baden, C., Pipal, C., Schoonvelde, M., & van der Velden, M. A. G. (2022). Three gaps in computational text
analysis methods for social sciences: A research agenda. Communication Methods and Measures, 16(1), 1-18.
https://doi.org/10.1080/19312458.2021.2015574
Braun, V. & Clarke, V. (2006). Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative Research in Psychology. 3(2):
77–101. https://doi.org/10.1191/1478088706qp063oa
Curty, R., Greer, R., & White, T. (2021). Teaching undergraduates with quantitative data in the social sciences at
University of California Santa Barbara: a local report. Available from: https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0xp6b513
https://doi.org/10.25436/E2101H
Curty, R., Greer, R., & White, T. (2022). Teaching undergraduates with quantitative data in the social sciences at
University of California Santa Barbara [Data set]. https://doi.org/10.25349/D9402J
Dowling, M., & Lucey, B. (2023). ChatGPT for (finance) research: The Bananarama conjecture. Finance
Research Letters, 53, 103662. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.frl.2023.103662
Floridi, L. (2023). AI as Agency without Intelligence: On ChatGPT, large language models, and other generative
models. Philosophy & Technology, 36(1), 15. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13347-023-00621-y
Fraiwan, M., & Khasawneh, N. (2023). A Review of ChatGPT Applications in Education, Marketing, Software
Engineering, and Healthcare: Benefits, Drawbacks, and Research Directions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.00237.
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2305.00237
Gauthier, R. P., & Wallace, J. R. (2022). The Computational Thematic Analysis Toolkit. Proceedings of the ACM
on Human-Computer Interaction, 6(GROUP), 1-15. https://doi.org/10.1145/3492844
Gao, J., Guo, Y., Lim, G., Zhan, T., Zhang, Z., Li, T. J. J., & Perrault, S. T. (2023). CollabCoder: A GPT-
Powered Workflow for Collaborative Qualitative Analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.07366.
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2304.07366
George, A. S., & George, A. H. (2023). A review of ChatGPT AI's impact on several business sectors. Partners
Universal International Innovation Journal, 1(1), 9-23. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7644359
Hassani, H., & Silva, E. S. (2023). The role of ChatGPT in data science: how ai-assisted conversational interfaces
are revolutionizing the field. Big data and cognitive computing, 7(2), 62. https://doi.org/10.3390/bdcc7020062
Hao, S., Gu, Y., Ma, H., Hong, J. J., Wang, Z., Wang, D. Z., & Hu, Z. (2023). Reasoning with language model is
planning with world model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14992. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2305.14992
Jiang, J. A., Wade, K., Fiesler, C., & Brubaker, J. R. (2021). Supporting serendipity: Opportunities and challenges
for Human-AI Collaboration in qualitative analysis. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction,
5(CSCW1), 1-23. https://doi.org/10.1145/3449168
Kennedy, B.L. and Thornberg, R. (2018), “Deduction, induction, and abduction”. In Flick, U. (Ed.), The SAGE
Handbook of Qualitative Data Collection, Sage Publications, London, pp. 49-64.
Kurniadi, D., Septiana, Y., & Sutedi, A. (2023). Alternative Text Pre-Processing using Chat GPT Open AI. Jurnal
Nasional Pendidikan Teknik Informatika: JANAPATI, 12(1). https://doi.org/10.23887/janapati.v12i1.59746
Lo, C. K. (2023). What Is the Impact of ChatGPT on Education? A Rapid Review of the Literature. Education
Sciences, 13(4), 410. https://doi.org/10.3390/educsci13040410
Lund, B. D., Wang, T., Mannuru, N. R., Nie, B., Shimray, S., & Wang, Z. (2023). ChatGPT and a new academic
reality: Artificial Intelligence‐written research papers and the ethics of the large language models in scholarly
publishing. Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology. 74(5), 570-581
https://doi.org/10.1002/asi.24750
Nelson, L. K. (2020). Computational grounded theory: A methodological framework. Sociological Methods &
Research, 49(1), 3-42. https://doi.org/10.1177/0049124117729703
Nowell, L. S., Norris, J. M., White, D. E., & Moules, N. J. (2017). Thematic analysis: Striving to meet the
trustworthiness criteria. International journal of qualitative methods, 16(1), 1609406917733847.
Persico, D., Dagnino, F., Earp, J., Manganello, D., Passarelli, M., & Pozzi, D. (2017a). D2. 3 Report on interviews
with experts and informants. Available from: http://www.gaminghorizons.eu/wp-
content/uploads/sites/18/2017/09/D2.3_Interviews-report.pdf
Persico,D., Bailey, C. T. Buijtenweg, T. (2017b). D2.1 Systematic Review and Methodological Framework.
Available from: https://www.gaminghorizons.eu/wp-content/uploads/sites/18/2017/05/D2.1-State-of-the-Art-
Literature-review.pdf
Perrotta C, Persico D., Haggis M., Bailey C., Passarelli M., Buijntenweg T., & Earp J. (2018). Gaming Horizons
Stakeholder Interviews - anonymised (1.2) [Data set]. Zenodo. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1163698
Rai, A. (2020). Explainable AI: From black box to glass box. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 48,
137-141. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11747-019-00710-5
Rahman, M. M., & Watanobe, Y. (2023). Chatgpt for education and research: Opportunities, threats, and
strategies. Applied Sciences, 13(9), 5783. https://doi.org/10.3390/app13095783
Renz, S. M., Carrington, J. M., & Badger, T. A. (2018). Two strategies for qualitative content analysis: An
intramethod approach to triangulation. Qualitative health research, 28(5), 824-831.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1049732317753586
Richards, K. A. R., & Hemphill, M. A. (2018). A practical guide to collaborative qualitative data analysis.
Journal of Teaching in Physical education, 37(2), 225-231. https://doi.org/10.1123/jtpe.2017-0084.
Sallam, M. (2023, March). ChatGPT utility in healthcare education, research, and practice: systematic review on
the promising perspectives and valid concerns. Healthcare, 11(6), p. 887).
https://doi.org/10.3390/healthcare11060887
Sanmarchi, F., Golinelli, D., & Bucci, A. (2023). A step-by-step Researcher's Guide to the use of an AI-based
transformer in epidemiology: an exploratory analysis of ChatGPT using the STROBE checklist for observational
studies. medRxiv, 2023-02. https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.02.06.23285514
van Dis, E. A., Bollen, J., Zuidema, W., van Rooij, R., & Bockting, C. L. (2023). ChatGPT: five priorities for
research. Nature, 614(7947), 224-226.
Wei, J., Tay, Y., Bommasani, R., Raffel, C., Zoph, B., Borgeaud, S., ... & Fedus, W. (2022). Emergent abilities of
large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.07682.
Xiao, Z., Yuan, X., Liao, Q. V., Abdelghani, R., & Oudeyer, P. Y. (2023, March). Supporting Qualitative
Analysis with Large Language Models: Combining Codebook with GPT-3 for Deductive Coding. In Companion
Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces (pp. 75-78).
Zhou, Y., Muresanu, A. I., Han, Z., Paster, K., Pitis, S., Chan, H., & Ba, J. (2022). Large language models are
human-level prompt engineers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.01910.
