                Writing user personas with Large Language Models
   Testing phase 6 of a Thematic Analysis of semi-structured interviews

                                              Stefano De Paoli
                                 Abertay University, Sociology Division
                                         s.depaoli@abertay.ac.uk


Abstract
The goal of this paper is establishing if we can satisfactorily perform a Thematic Analysis (TA) of semi-
structured interviews using a Large Language Model (more precisely GPT3.5-Turbo). Building on
previous work by the author, which established an embryonal process for conducting a TA with the model,
this paper will perform a further analysis and then cover the last phase of a TA (phase 6), which entails
the writing up of the result. This phase was not covered by the previous work. In particular, the focus will
be on using the results of a TA done with the LLM on a dataset of user interviews, for writing user
personas, with the model building on the TA to produce the personas narratives. User personas are models
of real users, usually built from a data analysis like interviews with a sample of users. User personas are
tools often used in User Centered Design processes. The paper shows that the model can build basic user
personas with an acceptable quality deriving them from themes, and that the model can serve for the
generation of ideas for user personas.


Keywords: Large Language Models, Thematic Analysis, User Personas, Themes, Writing


Introduction
The problem of this paper is to understand if we can use a Large Language Model (specifically GPT3.5-
Turbo) to perform a Thematic Analysis (TA) of semi-structured interviews, also focusing on the last phase
of a TA, which entails the writing up of the results. This work is conducted within a process of Human-
AI collaboration, a concept in the field of Artificial Intelligence (AI) that assumes that humans and AI
systems can collaborate to achieve goals and tasks (see e.g. Vössing et al., 2022, Siemon, 2021 for a
general overview; and Jiang et al. 2021, specifically for qualitative analysis reflections on this). Elsewhere,
I presented an embryonal, and perhaps still crude, process for conducting a TA with the same LLM,
following some of the key phases to a TA proposed by Braun & Clarke (2006) in their seminal work.
These 6 phases include the human analyst(s): familiarisation with the data (phase 1), generation of initial
codes, i.e. relevant features in the data (phase 2, done inductively in my case), the generation of themes,
or patterns in the data, based on sorting the code in themes (phase 3), confirming the validity of themes,
by reviewing them (phase 4), the renaming and summarising of themes, to confirm their validity (phase
5) and the writing up of the results, as an integral part of TA (phase 6). In my previous work I argued that
the LLM can only reasonably perform phases 2-5 of a TA. Phase 1 and phase 6 were not tackled directly,
either because the memory and tokens limits of the LLMs do not allow the LLM to perform the work
(phase 1 – familiarisation) or because of potential ethical issues (phase 6 – writing the report). In this
paper, I would like to tackle some aspects associated with phase 6 of a TA and the process of writing up
the results.
The focus of this paper is methodological: establishing the validity of the use of LLMs for the conduction
of qualitative analysis of data (specifically TA), with a focus on semi-structured interviews and largely in
the context of social sciences. As I discussed in my previous paper, one of the epistemological challenges
for this is that qualitative analysis is normally done by humans through interpretation of meaning, and this
is something that LLMs are not necessarily capable as they operate on the language from a computational,
logical and structural perspective (Floridi, 2023). Nonetheless, it has been possible to show that an LLM
can perform something looking like a basic inductive TA with at least some degree of validity, through a
qualitative comparison with the work of human analysts (De Paoli, 2023). Other authors have used
Cohen’s kappa to confirm inter-reliability between an LLM and human conders, based on deductive
coding processes (Xiao et al., 2023; Gao et al., 2023). TA can indeed be done with a deductive approach
(where the grid of analysis is decided before-hand) or inductive where codes and themes are generated
bottom-up from the data. I am interested in performing with LLMs an inductive approach to TA. It remains
therefore to be assessed whether we can also cover phase 6 of the TA. For Clarke & Braun (2013):
“Writing is an integral element of the analytic process in TA (and most qualitative research). Writing-up
involves weaving together the analytic narrative and (vivid) data extracts to tell the reader a coherent and
persuasive story about the data and contextualising it in relation to existing literature.”. As such writing
cannot be detached from the process of doing a TA. Therefore, to assess if an LLM can satisfactorily
conduct a TA, we need to attempt also phase 6 with the model.
There is discussion about using LLMs to write research work, and there clearly are important ethical
implications associated with this (see Lund et al. 2023 for an overview), whilst we have also seen authors
citing these models as co-authors (e.g. King & chatGPT). On the other hand, journals and scholarly
publishers have begun to create policies to clarify what is the acceptable use of these models in academic
publishing. These, correctly in my view, start to be very stringent. For example, the editor-in-chief of the
journal Science stated that they decided to update their “license and Editorial Policies to specify that text
generated by ChatGPT (or any other AI tools) cannot be used in the work, nor can figures, images, or
graphics be the products of such tools. And an AI program cannot be an author.” (Thorp, 2023, p. 313).
There also have been cases where publishers have removed chatGPT from the list of authors of already
published papers (e.g. O'Connor, 2022).
We can agree with Thorp when he points out that AI manipulated images or text which is not produced
by an author should not be included in academic publications and may largely amount to academic
misconduct. However, we should consider that using LLMs to write research results may also entail
working on intermediate phases of the writing process and within a Human-AI collaboration approach, or
on scientific products which may have other applied use for other research activities. For Braun & Clarke
(2006), phase 6 of TA, is an integral part of the analysis method, and therefore we should explore if also
this phase can be performed with the support of an LLM. This paper will attempt at tackling this problem.
In this way the focus of the manuscript is not on the ethics discourses around the use of LLMs for writing
scholarly work, but it is rather methodological. I will not propose a process to use the LLM to write a full
paper (or part of it), rather I will focus on using the LLM to write intermediate narratives/models, which
can be used to support other research activities. I will concentrate on using the LLM to write user personas,
based on the results of a TA (of semi-structured interviews) conducted by the LLM in cooperation with
the author.
User personas are an ideal candidate for the goal of this work. The Norman&Nielsen Group (NNG) defines
a user persona as “a fictional, yet realistic, description of a typical or target user of the product. It is used
to promote empathy, increase awareness and memorability of target users, prioritize features, and inform
design decisions.” (Harley, 2015). User personas are an important and established tool in user-centered
design (UCD) and contribute significantly toward the creation of e.g. tools or services and help the
designers to focus on people and specific aspects of them, during the design activities. A persona is
normally a narrative with a variety of additional details (such as a picture, or specific traits of the user).
They are built with a focus on identifying key aspects of the target users for a new design (or re-design),
which include for instance the identification of the user needs, of their pain points, objectives, attitudes,
behaviours, skills and so on, all of which should contribute to inform design decisions about e.g. a digital
service. A useful overview of the advantages of user personas is provided by Miaskiewicz & Kozar (2011),
who reviewed how several key authors have formulated these advantages. For a better understanding of
the perception and importance of personas in UCD readers can consult for example the papers by Nielsen
& Storgaard (2014) or Matthews & Whittaker (2012).
There may also be different types of personas used in UCD, which can support the design work in different
ways. Again NNG, for example write that there can be broad and narrow personas (Salazar, 2020). The
first is based on shallow data and can serve high level decisions. The narrow ones instead are based on
more granular data and can support more specific decisions. Likewise, NNG stipulates that personas can
be lightweight (or proto persona), qualitative and statistical (Laubheimer, 2020). The last two in particular
are based on solid empirical evidence, with the statistical personas based on large quantity of data (but
very costly to produce) about the target uses and the qualitative personas (which are the most widely used
in UCD) that are based on the use qualitative research data, like interviews conducted with a sample of
target users or with ethnographic observations of e.g. the target users at work. It is the qualitative and
narrow personas I would like to focus on. For building qualitative personas a common way to gather data
is with semi-structured interviews with a sample of the potential target users, and then an analysis is done
on the interviews to identify patterns across the interviews. These patterns are the basis for building the
personas narrative, including e.g. their background, goals, preferences or challenges. This is because
recurring patterns signal potential common user needs or pain points which can and should then be the
focus of the UCD work. TA is one of the analysis methods that can be adopted for the identification of
these patterns across the interviews (see for example Turner et al., 2013 or Rosala, 2019).
We can therefore understand that (qualitative) user personas are an intermediate product of the user
research in UCD, which can support the work of designers, and that they are the results of collecting
empirical data and of qualitative analysis. If, as I suggested previously, we assume that that an LLM can
perform at least in an embryonal form an inductive TA of semi-structured interviews (Phases 2-5
according to Braun & Clarke), we can explore whether the LLM can satisfactorily produce personas
narratives based on this same analysis, or at least produce something which has some semblance with a
user persona. Personas can therefore potentially be a good example of textual result here we can attempt
to cover phase 6 of a TA as proposed by Braun & Clarke. This will be to focus of the following pages.




Literature review
There is limited research on the use of LLMs for qualitative analysis. For example, a working paper by
Mesec (2023) provided a comparative study between chatGPT and a human analyst based on one
interview. However, this approach does appear rather simplistic as it just leverages the web chat
application (https://chat.openai.com/), rather than use the model via an API to process data with some
scale. This mirrors some tutorials that are available online1, which propose basic elements of qualitative
analysis, leveraging the web chat version of the model, and needing to manually paste interview transcripts
in chatGPT and copying the results in e.g. text processing files. More solid existing research largely
focusses on the process coding (covering mostly the equivalent of phase 2 of a TA), and as far as the
author’s understanding these works adopted a deductive approach to analysis (Xiao et al., 2023; Gao et
al., 2023). The approach I am exploring is instead entirely inductive where the model operates without a
prior coding framework. Moreover, in my opinion these works (nor indeed the online tutorials) do not
align or propose any significant methodological discussion or reflection, and they seem to assume we can
do a qualitative analysis with an LLM, with limited engagement of what this means for the methodological
rigour of social research. They do not much reflect on what are the implications of doing social sciences
qualitative analysis with the support of an LLM, or if indeed we should attempt qualitative analysis with
an LLM. My approach is more cautious, and I propose that methodological issues should be put into focus
alongside our attempts to establish whether we can indeed perform a qualitative analysis with LLMs. For
example, we still do not know if academic journals will accept a paper which adopts an LLM performed
TA, and we still need to find agreement if this has sufficient scientific rigour. Nonetheless, in particular
the work by Xiao et al. (2023) and Gao et al. (2023) are important because they raise attention to several
important issues, which include the crucial role of the prompt to the model (see later), the human-AI
collaboration in qualitative analysis with LLMs, the use of LLMs for doing intermediate steps of a full
analysis (like e.g. initial coding, or team discussion). The use of LLMs for qualitative analysis does seem
indeed a potentially nascent area of inquiry, and therefore there is limited literature, but also a need to
develop processes which are methodologically appropriate and accepted by the scientific community.
Some words need also to be spent in relation to personas, and specifically in relation to the use of LLMs
for the generation of personas. As LLMs can easily produce textual outputs from a prompt, we have seen
propositions to use chatGPT (again the web chat version) for producing user personas. There is material
such as online videos or blog posts which explain how to generate a persona with chatGPT, with prompts
such as: “Generate a user persona about a busy mum who lives in a city that wants to make sure her kids
eat healthy without compromising time away from her hobbies and career”2. Prompt such as these can be
used within the web chat to generate a user persona, with some believable details including a narrative

1
    See e.g. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9yN2bmf6BNE or https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8dTs7D42ge0
2
    See e.g. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=watkVh1U_ko
and demographics. Further, it is possible to ask the model to write the output received “in the format of a
user persona” and the model will propose lists of e.g. pain points, needs attitudes and so on. As it has been
noted, there is something powerful in the model since it knows what a user persona is 3 without needing
any contextual explanation. This is a relevant observation as later in the analysis and the generation of
personas, we will assume the LLM knows what a user persona is. However, these personas generated
with the LLM without being based on any empirical material are entirely fictional, and do not have the
realistic component that the definition of a persona seen earlier implies (‘fictional, yet realistic’). Whilst
they look believable, they seem unlikely to be a good and realistic representation of the potential target
users for UCD. Kocaballi (2023) has proposed a more structured approach, rather than just simply asking
the LLM to generate a persona, to emulate an entire UCD process with an LLM, including the generation
of personas. However, even if more structured, this work is entirely fictionally created by the model. So
far so that, that there have been invitations to avoid using LLMs for generating personas4, since these
cannot be a true representation of target users for a product or service, and LLMs cannot replace the work
of user research which requires inquiring with real users (e.g. with interviews or ethnographies). This
debate is at the moment taking place largely on websites and other online fora, rather than on academic
publications, and it is symptomatic of larger processes of automation of human work and of the
oversimplifications which are possible with LLMs. It is not my intent to enter this specific debate,
especially in the field of user research.
However, I believe it is rather different to use the LLM to generate user personas fictionally, without any
underlying empirical research, and have instead personas generated based on some form of TA and on
real qualitative data, within a Human-AI research collaboration mode. If the LLM (with the support of the
human researcher) can produce at least satisfactorily some forms (or at least ideas) of user personas based
on a data analysis, we may also be able to make a step forward toward covering phase 6 of a TA.


Research design
This paper proposes a research design which mirrors the one I proposed in my previous paper (De Paoli,
2023). I will, in particular, cover phases 2-4 of a TA which will include an initial generation of codes, the
grouping of the codes in themes, and a validation of themes. Phase 5, which covers the renaming of
themes, will not be covered here (largely for keeping the text compact), but it certainly is possible also to
operate this phase if needed. Readers can consult the specificities of the proposed (albeit embryonal)
approach to a TA with an LLM in De Paoli (2023). Here I will concentrate on a shorter summary of the
method-process for performing a TA, and then focus on covering phase 6. In the previous publication I
also reflected on the limits of the LLM I am using (GPT3.5-Turbo), including on the limits to the number
of tokens and the lack of memory, which impact the processing of large amounts of text. Again, the reader
can see these reflections in the previous paper.
First, we need to provide some definitions. We have already mentioned earlier the ‘prompt’, this is
essentially what we ask the model to produce. The output/response is what the model produces based on


3
    See https://www.persona-institut.de/en/chat-gpt-3-und-personas/
4
    See e.g. https://uxdesign.cc/please-do-not-use-chatgpt-to-generate-personas-85ffeaa6690b
its understanding of the prompt instructions. Figure 1, shows a simple prompt and the response, as
generated by the chat version of GPT.




Figure 1 – Prompt and response of chatGPT (web chat)
Second, to perform this research I used the model via the OpenAI API (https://openai.com/blog/openai-
api), and not the web chat. The API allows to call the model inside python scripts. The advantage of this
(over the use of the chat version) is that we can work with data and do manipulation and parsing of the
data. It is because of this that we can have the model process real textual data with some degree of scale,
upon which attempting to perform a data analysis (like a TA). In this paper the specificities of the python
scripts will not be discussed unless necessary, whilst more space will be given to a discussion of the
prompts.
As my goal is to build personas from a TA of semi-structured interviews, I selected an open dataset
(covered by a Creative Commons license), available from zenodo. This ensures previous anonymisation
of the data and the possibility to reuse this data. The selected dataset is the farmers’ interviews (n=14)
conducted by the project EUREKA, which is a subset of a larger dataset (Vágó, & Spanoghe, 2023).
EUREKA was an H2020 project which aimed “to strengthen and improve the flow of agricultural and
rural-related knowledge and innovation at European, national and regional level.”5. EUREKA has
produced a “first working version of the so-called EU FarmBook“ digital platform. Interviews were
conducted with several user groups including farmers, forestry workers or various advisors, in different
European broad regions (including e.g. the Mediterranean or the North Sea regions). These interviews
were conducted to produce user personas and user journeys, and therefore the research was planned with
a focus on UCD. For the farmers’ group, six personas were prepared and are available on the project
website6. Therefore, we can consider this a potentially good dataset for the task of using an LLM to
perform the writing up of a TA in the form of user personas.
Due to the maximum limit of the tokens in the model (4097), interviews had to be broken down into
smaller chunks. From the initial 14 interviews, 31 chunks were created ranging between 700 to 1600
tokens (except for one short interview, which was already around 400 tokens). Data cleaning and
preparation was necessary before the analysis, like removing special characters (e.g. text in Cyrillic for
example, which had an English translation in the interview transcript) and saving all the interviews in
plain text files.
The design I propose here is based on performing three steps: (1) first perform a TA with LLM on the
interview chunks, replicating and enriching the process already proposed in my previous work; (2) using
the LLM to create personas based on the results of the TA, with appropriate prompting; (3) offer an


5
    See https://h2020eureka.eu/da/about
6
    See https://h2020eureka.eu/personas-and-user-journeys
evaluation of the results, by looking at which themes and codes were used by the LLM to create one
persona.


Performing the TA with the LLM
Generating codes (phase 2)
Phase 2 of a TA involves generating inductively the codes from the data. Since the goal here is to try to
develop user personas, I asked the model to identify separately codes for the users’ a) needs and b)
challenges. For this I used the prompt presented in Figure 2. This prompt is similar to the one I proposed
in my previous work, however I added to the prompt a definition of what is a challenge. This definition in
part was taken from a report of the EUREKA project (Van der Cruyssen, 2021), where a challenge was
defined in relation to “access to data and knowledge” and, to specify this better, I added a simpler
definition of a challenge. For the separate generation of user needs, I used in the prompt a definition from
the UK Government (2017) which I consider simple and clear which defines user needs as “the needs that
a user has of a service, and which that service must satisfy for the user to get the right outcome for them”.
Considering the limits of the max tokens of the model, I asked the model to generate up to 2 challenges
and up to 3 needs from each interview chunk. Each chunk of interview is passed into the prompt via a for-
loop in the variable ‘text’.




Figure 2 – Prompt for initial coding of challenges


This prompt allowed the identification of n=62 user code-challenges and n=93 user code-needs from the
interviews. Due to possible duplications (i.e the model goes through each interview chunk separately, and
thus can duplicate codes), I used a previous strategy of reducing each codebook (see De Paoli, 2023), by
merging very similar codes. After the reduction, the codebook was n=39 for the challenges and n=75
needs. Examples of codes generated with this prompt can be seen in Tables 5-8, in the section ‘Evaluation’
of the paper.
Finding Themes (phase 3)
The subsequent phase of TA (following Braun & Clarke process) entails sorting and grouping the codes
(from phase 2) in themes. In essence codes are features in the data that the analyst identifies, and themes
are patterns in the data which encapsulate multiple codes. For this purpose, I used the prompt shown in
Figure 3. This is very similar to the one I used in my previous work (again see De Paoli, 2023). In this
case I asked the LLM (for both the list of code-challenges and code-needs, separately) to generate 12
groups (or themes). This number (12) is, to an extent, arbitrary, however I estimated it as follows: the
EUREKA project had produced 6 personas from the dataset of farmers, I thus estimated that for building
one persona I would need to use 2 theme-challenges and 2 theme-needs (so 6 *2 for each theme book).




Figure 3 – Prompt used to sort codes into themes


Four full examples of themes (for challenges and needs) are presented in Tables 5-8 in the section
‘Evaluation’ of the paper, including the name of the theme, its description (as provided by the model) and
the list codes, descriptions and related quotes. Table 1 and Table 2 instead present the full list of theme-
challenges and theme-needs, with name, descriptions and the number of underlying codes, generated by
the model in this phase (with the prompt from Figure 3).
 Nr.    Theme-        Description                                                                  Nr of
        Challenge                                                                                  codes
 1      Limited       This group contains topics related to the challenges faced by farmers in     8
        Access to     accessing information, either due to limited network availability, poorly
        Information   maintained websites, language barriers, or a lack of reliable sources.
 2      Trustworthi   This group contains topics related to the challenge of verifying the        7
        ness of       trustworthiness of online information. It includes topics such as filtering
        Online        through online information, identifying misleading information, and
        Information   finding reliable sources.
 3      Digital       This group contains topics related to the use and challenge of digital      9
        Tools and     tools and technologies, including finding effective tools, verifying their
        Technologie   effectiveness, and ensuring user-friendliness.
        s
 4      Education     This group contains topics related to education and training in              3
        and           agriculture, including language barriers, a lack of formal education, and
        Training      the importance of learning by doing.
 5      Regulations   This group contains topics related to regulations and compliance in          4
        and           agriculture, including difficulties faced by farmers in calculating
        Compliance    fodder/feed rations and managing data related to animal fertility.
 6      Navigating    This group contains topics related to the challenge of navigating            3
        Online        through vast amounts of online information to find relevant and
        Information   accurate sources.
 7      Innovation    This group contains topics related to the use of digital tools to innovate   2
        and Change    and optimize work in the agricultural sector.
 8      Business      This group contains topics related to the challenge of finding               2
        Planning      information for business planning, particularly for innovative crops.
 9      Personal      This group contains topics related to the concern about the lack of          1
        Connection    personal connection and the superficiality of digital communication in
                      the agricultural world.
 10    Advocacy       This group contains topics related to the challenge of connecting            1
       and Sharing    advocacy and professional organizations to share information.
       Information
 11    Language      This group contains topics related to the challenge of language barriers      1
       Barriers      faced by farmers.
 12    Access to     This group contains topics related to the challenge of finding reliable       1
       Agricultural information on agricultural machinery.
       Machinery
Table 1– Theme-challenges generated by the model in phase 3
 Nr.    Theme-Need         Description                                                           Nr of
                                                                                                 codes
 1      Access to        This group includes topics related to the need for quick and easy       8
        Information      access to information, easy access to relevant and up-to-date
                         information, efficient filtering of scientific papers and keyword
                         searches, and a central point of access to relevant information.
 2      Digital Tools    This group includes topics related to the need for digital tools and    10
        and Applications sources to have practical relevance, practical digital tools to
                         increase productivity, digital tools to aid in agricultural tasks and
                         processes, and affordable digital tools and equipment.
 3      Professional     This group includes topics related to the need for personal and         4
        Exchange and     professional exchange with colleagues and representatives, a
        Networking       platform to share experiences and knowledge, and connection and
                         community within the agricultural industry.
 4      Animal Health    This group includes topics related to finding solutions to animal       5
        and Farming      health and farming issues, optimizing work to prevent waste in the
        Issues           company, and monitoring and tracking poultry health and mortality
                         rates.
 5      Expert Advice    This group includes topics related to the need for expert advice and    4
        and Consultation consultation for problem-solving and informed decision-making.
 6      Language and     This group includes topics related to the need for communication        1
        Communication and gathering information in a language that is understood,
                         particularly when it comes to technical terms related to agriculture.
 7      Beekeeping       This group includes topics related to the need for current and          4
                         updated information on the beekeeping industry and policies,
                         efficient data management tools for beekeeping, and digital tools to
                         make beekeeping easier and more efficient.
 8      Organic          This group includes topics related to staying updated with              1
        Agriculture and information related to organic agriculture and ancient seed
        Ancient Seed     varieties.
        Varieties
 9      Mapping and      This group includes topics related to the need to use digital           1
        Documentation    applications for mapping and documentation purposes.
 10     Learning and     This group includes topics related to flexible learning options,        2
        Education        remote exams, and expert consultancy and advice.
 11     Grain Growing    This group includes topics related to practical information on grain    1
        and Livestock    growing, direct sowing, and grain as feed for livestock.
        Feed
 12     Agricultural     This group includes topics related to reliable information sources      3
        Machinery and    on agricultural machinery and equipment, objective comparison or
        Equipment        testing of agricultural products, and finding sensors specific to
                         agriculture.
Table 2 – Theme-needs generated by the model in phase 3
Evaluating Themes (phase 4)
In this phase of TA, the analyst re-evaluates the themes, identifies which ones are indeed solid themes and
which may just be sub-themes or only codes. This is a phase of re-evaluation of the previous phase and
solidification of the TA. In De Paoli (2023), I suggested using the parameter Temperature (T) of the model
for this evaluation. This parameter (alongside a similar parameter top_p) influences the response of the
model with a degree of randomness or ’creativity’. The parameter accepts values between 0 (no
randomness) and 1 (max randomness). All the previous analysis (phase 2 and 3) was done with T at 0
(zero). The approach I experimented with for phase 4, thus far, is to change the T parameter to a higher
value to see if some themes appear consistent and if others emerge. This time I also introduced a further
aspect for the potential review: the number of codes of each theme as presented in phase 3. Indeed, a few
themes generated in phase 3, are composed of just one code (see Tables 1 and 2). This may signal that the
theme could be weak and just a code (rather than a theme), and that operating the model with a higher T
at phase 4 may tell us new candidates' themes. Four theme-challenges (Nr. 9, 10, 11, 12 - Table 1) and
the same number of theme-needs (Nr. 6, 8, 9, 11 - Table 2) are only composed of one code. We also need
to remember that the list of code-challenges is smaller than that of code-needs, and therefore the model
had a small set of codes to build theme-challenges. Moreover, we need to remember that the themes were
built out of a reduction of the codebook, therefore even if they only have one code, in fact this code might
have appeared in multiple interviews.
Table 3 shows three sets of themes generated at T=0.5 for the theme-challenges (and the associated
number of codes). Table 4 shows the same for the theme-needs. We are looking in these tests for
consistency, but potentially also for new themes replacing previous themes with just one code.
 Nr.    Theme (Test_1)        Nr       Theme (Test_2)         Nr          Theme (Test_3)       Nr Codes
                              Codes                           Codes
 1      Limited Access to     10       Limited Access to      12          Limited Access to    10
        Information                    Information                        Information
 2      Trustworthiness of 3           Trustworthiness of     3            Trustworthiness     3
        Online Sources                 Online Sources                     of Online Sources
 3      Filtering through  2           Digital Tools and      2           Filtering            2
        Online                         Innovations                        Information
        Information
 4      Language Barriers 1            User-Friendliness      1           Language Barriers    1
                                       of Digital Tools
 5      Digital Tools for     5        Crop and Animal        1           Technical            1
        Agriculture                    Management                         Assistance
 6      Education and         3        Education and          2           Education and        2
        Training                       Training                           Training
 7      User-Friendliness     1        Business Planning      5           Digital Tools        5
        of Digital Tools               and Differentiation
 8      Business              4        Resistance to          1           User-Friendliness    1
        Management                     Change
 9      Forest                2        Advocacy and           1           Resistance to        1
        Management                     Professional                       Change
                                       Organizations
 10     Advocacy and         1         Personalization of    1           Small Market          1
        Professional                   Platforms
        Organizations
 11     Personalization of 1          Reliability of         3           Reliability           3
        Digital Tools                 Digital Sources
 12      Superficiality of   1        Superficiality of      1           Search Results        3
        Digital                       Digital
        Communication                 Communication
Table 3 – List of theme-challenges generated with T at 0.5 (3 tests) and number of codes
We can now compare Table 3 with Table 1 and look for consistency of (and thus solid) themes and for
potential candidates' themes to replace those with only one code. What we can observe is that the themes
in Table 1, from Nr 1 to 9 appear consistently also in Table 3. We can preliminary assume these are all
valid themes to keep. The code Nr. 11 in Table 1 (‘Language Barrier’), despite having only one code, is
consistent across Table 3 and should probably be kept. In fact, if we look at Table 6 in the ‘Evaluation’
section of the paper (which reports the full challenge-theme ‘Language Barriers’) we can see these barriers
emerged across multiple interviews. The remaining 3 themes with just one code in Table 1 (‘Personal
Connection’, ‘Advocacy and Sharing Information’ and ‘Access to Agricultural Machinery’) do not seem
to appear in Table 3 and may be candidates for clear replacement. In Table3, the theme ‘Superficiality of
digital communication’ appears twice (also with just one code), upon reading the description of this new
theme, this seemed to overlap with the theme ‘Personal Connections’ (or the lack thereof) from Table 1.
The original theme is then kept. The theme ‘Reliability’ appears in both Test_2 and Test_3 in Table 3 with
three codes and is a potential theme that can replace the theme on ‘Agricultural Machineries’, due to the
description of this theme referring to reliability (which also appear in the theme ‘Agricultural Machineries
from Table 1). The theme ‘Advocacy’ from Table 1 appears also in Test_1 in Table 3. This may therefore
be a good candidate to keep (despite the single code). Thus, the new list of theme-challenges from Table
1 will see the replacement of the theme Nr. 12 (‘Agricultural Machineries’), with the theme ‘Reliability’
(from Test_3, Nr. 11, Table 3), which is highlighted in yellow.
 Nr.    Theme (Test_1)        Nr        Theme (Test_2)         Nr        Theme (Test_3)           Nr
                              Codes                            Codes                              Codes
 1      Access to             9         Access to              7          Access to               7
        Information for                 Information                      Information
        Agriculture and                 Platforms
        Farming
 2      Digital Tools for     14        Digital Tools for      15        Digital Tools and        12
        Agriculture                     Farm Management                  Applications
 3      Personal and          4          Expert Knowledge      5         Expert Advice and        3
        Professional                    and Consultation                 Consultation
        Exchange
 4      Language and          1         Language and           1         Animal Health and        4
        Communication                   Communication                    Farming Issues
        in Agriculture
 5      Animal Health         6         Animal Health and      5         Professional             5
        and Husbandry                   Husbandry                        Exchange and
                                                                         Networking
 6      Sustainability and    2         Sustainable            2         Local Information        1
        Environmental                   Agriculture                      Sources
        Impact
 7      Digital               1         Equipment and          2          Regulatory              1
        Competence                      Machinery                        Compliance
 8      Beekeeping            3         Knowledge              3         Access to                2
                                        Sharing and                      Trustworthy
                                        Community                        Information
 9      Waste Reduction 3               Personalization and   2          Innovative Solutions     1
        and Optimization                User-Friendliness
 10     Community and       5           Efficiency and        3        Language and               2
        Connection in                   Waste Reduction                Learning
        Agriculture
 11     Expert              3         Remote Learning         2        Community and              2
        Consultancy and               and Support                      Connection
        Advice
 12     Personalization     2         Specific Industry       4        Grain Growing              1
        and User                      Knowledge
        Experience
Table 4 – List of theme-needs generated with T at 0.5 (3 tests) and number of codes
We can operate on a similar line now with the theme-needs. From Table 2, themes 1 to 7 will be kept as
valid since they reappear consistently in various shapes in Table 4. Also, in this case the theme ‘Language
and Communication’ despite having only one code, is kept due to its consistency across the three tests at
T 0.5. The themes 10 and 12 from Table 2 also will be kept as they reappear in Table 4 and have more
than one code. A decision needs thus to be made about the remaining themes with just one code from
Table 2 (respectively ‘Organic Agriculture and Ancient Seed Varieties’, ‘Mapping and Documentation’
and ‘Grain Growing and Livestock Feed’). In Table 4, unlike Table 2, we see the issue of ‘Personalization’
appearing twice, this is a good candidate theme, also directly related with specific needs for digital tools
(we will use the Nr. 9 from Test_2 in Table 4, for our final list of themes). Also, the theme on ‘Community’
appears in all three tests and not in Table 2, this is also a good candidate theme (we will use the Nr. 8 from
Test_2, Table 4). Lastly the theme of ‘Waste Reduction’ also appears in Test_1 and Test_2 but not in
Table 2, hence it will be kept as theme (we will reuse Nr 10 from Test_2, Table 4). The theme-needs from
phase 4 adopted for the final theme-needs book (replacing three weak themes from Table 2), are
highlighted in yellow in Table 4.
The final theme books (for both challenges and needs) thus encompass the changes to the themes as
presented above, with one change for the theme-challenges, and three changes for the theme-needs.
Moreover, the final theme books include all the previous codes, descriptions and quotes (identified in
phase 2, before the reduction of the codebook). Again, for examples see Tables 5-8 in the section
‘Evaluation’ of the paper.
The process of conducting a TA also entails a phase 5 related with renaming and summarising themes. As
said earlier, this phase is not performed here, and readers can consult De Paoli (2023) for an approach to
operate that phase. Will focus now on using the two theme books (challenges and needs) to conduct phase
6 of a TA: the writing of the results.


Writing up user personas
We have a list of 12 theme-needs and 12 challenges-needs from the TA. We will attempt to build user
personas with this analysis. In phase 3 (when estimating the number of themes to be inferred) I had
assumed that one persona would be built using 2 theme-challenges and 2 theme-needs. Therefore, since
not all the themes will be used (and are not normally used by human writers of personas), we need to
operate a selection. There may be different ways of deciding which themes should compose a single
persona. For example, we could have the human analyst decide which theme-needs and theme-challenges
to use, or we can use a randomised process of selection of the themes, or a mix of the above two. For this
simple experiment, I wrote python code to select at random two sets of themes to be used (i.e 2 theme-
challenges and 2 theme-needs), as described in Figure 4. This was done by creating a list of random tuples
for each theme book (6 tuples of 2 themes each) and then selecting one tuple. Every time that the script is
run, the list of tuples is randomised again. This randomised process entails in fact 78 combinations for
each theme book (thus potentially allowing 6084 combinations across all themes). The selected theme-
challenges and theme-needs are then passed to the model via the prompt, to generate a user persona. To
increase the variability of the personas I also operated the model with Temperature set a 1, but this is just
a choice to have some more ‘creativity’ from the model in its response.
Figure 4 – Themes (tuples) selection and personas writing
Note also that when building personas in UCD, normally there are more dimensions included such as
attitudes, behaviour, interests and so on. Here we are working only on two theme-dimensions (as we are
attempting to establish a process), however it would be possible to have more themes related to other
dimensions of personas. It is sufficient to reproduce the previous steps of the analysis to generate these
additional themes. However, several theme-dimensions may impact the limit of the model in relation to
the max tokens.
Figure 5 presents the prompt used for generating personas. This deserves some comments.




Figure 5- Prompt used for the generation of a use persona
First the randomly selected tuples of themes (2 theme-needs and 2 challenge-needs) are passed to the
model as lists (‘List of needs’, ‘List of challenges’), each element of a tuple includes the theme name, the
theme description (from phase 3-4) and all the underlying codes and the associated quotes (phase 2-4).
This is the material (i.e. the analysis results) that we ask the model to use for building the persona. In the
prompt, we ask the model to include the persona’s: goal, background description, a vague indication of
the age, three needs, two challenges, and a quote illustrating the goal and whether the persona is tech
savvy and open to innovation.
An important aspect of this prompt is that it is not telling the model anything about what kind of personas
to build, like who the persona is (what the persona does, her job, her goal, her motives etc). It just informs
the model of what formal element to include (e.g. a goal, a quote, three needs). This is significantly
different from the examples of prompts we can find online related to asking chatGPT to generate user
personas, where details about the persona need to be provided to the model. For instance, in the literature
review we mentioned one such prompt (taken from a youtube video tutorial), where it was specified that
the persona to be generated was a busy mum, living in a city, with kids, concerned about health food and
career. Another example taken from an online tutorial (this time of an audience persona) is “Create an
audience persona for a business that sells trendy fashion wear for young adults, Colorful clothing and
jewelry. The business sells at reasonable prices so all young adults can purchase from this brand”7. This
level of details is not needed in the prompting when the persona is generated using results of a TA, and
the prompt only needs to provide indication about the formal structure or components of the persona
narrative. I only added one detail to the prompt that the persona should be from a ‘from a specific EU
country’. Indeed, the prompt (without this specific instruction) would sometimes provide also the country
in which the persona works but sometimes it would not, and this I believe is dependent upon countries
being named or not in the data that the model uses (i.e. tuples).
What follows are two examples of personas generated with the above prompt. The persona Katharina was
generated using (with the random selection) the following tuple of theme-challenges: (1) Navigating
Online Information and (2) Language Barriers; and the following tuple of theme-needs: (1)
Personalization and User-Friendliness and (2) Animal Health and Farming Issues. The persona Gisela was
generated using the following tuple of theme-challenges: (1) Language Barriers and (2) Personal
Connection; and the following tuple of theme-needs: (1) Agricultural Machinery and Equipment and (2)
Knowledge Sharing and Community.
I structured the personas in a table and included a picture which I generated with Dall-e
(https://openai.com/product/dall-e-2), mostly to attempt to reproduce some of the empathy that user
personas seek to achieve. However, what we are interested in considering is the textual narrative and
whether the textual description of these personas do appear credible (i.e. ‘fictional, yet realistic’ - Harley,
2015). This will be discussed in the next section of the paper. Please note that in the appendix there are
some further examples of personas generated from the analysis, using the prompt of Figure 4. Also note
the order of items of the personas are presented in the way they were produced by the model.




7
    See https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=db3zlVeAMhE
                              Name: Katarina
                              Age: Middle-aged
                              Country: Poland



Narrative Background: Katarina is a middle-aged farmer based in Poland. She inherited her family
farm and has been managing it for over a decade. She is passionate about farming and aims to optimize
her productivity while following ethical farming practices. Since there are limited resources and
solutions available to her in her area, Katarina has to rely mostly on online information to find
solutions to her problems related to animal health and farming practices. However, she faces language
barriers and struggles to maneuver through the vast amount of information available online. Katarina
values user-friendly digital tools and prioritizes the need for problem-solving and optimization of her
farming practices.

Main Goal: To find innovative and effective solutions to improve animal health and optimize her
farming practices.

Main Needs:
- Filtering information sources to ensure the accuracy of the information
- Finding solutions to problems related to animal health and farming practices
- Optimizing work in the company and avoiding waste

Main Challenges:
- Difficulty accessing information due to language barriers
- Navigating through vast amounts of online information
- Filtering out misleading information from the internet

IT Skills: Medium
Attitude Toward Digital Innovation: High

Quote Representative of the Goal: "My opinion is that digital sources can help optimize work on the
farm. If you have tools that allow you to work better, the entrepreneur works better, the employees and
the company work better, and so on. Maybe you can also avoid a lot of waste."
                              Name: Gisela Schmidt
                              Age: Middle-aged (45)
                              Country: Germany




 Main Goal: To find reliable information sources on agricultural machinery and equipment specific to
 agriculture.

 Background: Gisela Schmidt is a middle-aged farmer from Germany who runs a small farm with her
 family that specializes in crop production. She has been in the agricultural industry for over 20 years
 and has seen its evolution with the introduction of technology and digitalization. While Gisela has a
 basic understanding of digital tools, she faces challenges in finding reliable information and sources
 specific to agriculture. Her main concern is finding reliable information sources on agricultural
 machinery and equipment, including sensors specific to agriculture. Gisela believes that she can
 improve crop production and save time and money if she can find the right sensors and equipment.
 She often spends a lot of time searching for information online but struggles to find trustworthy
 sources.

 Main Needs:
 - Reliable information sources on agricultural machinery and equipment
 - Finding sensors specific to agriculture
 - Objective comparison or testing of agricultural products

 Main Challenges:
 - Language and education barriers
 - Difficulty accessing reliable information
 - Lack of personal connection and superficiality of digital communication

 IT Skills: Medium
 Attitude toward digital innovation: Medium

 Quote: "Then I used the keywords of those research papers to find other producers, not the salesmen,
 of the sensors but producers. And then I got in contact with the dual M guys, but also with Medusa,
 with all kinds of software and hardware and software suppliers that are building nice sensors, but not
 specifically for agriculture."




Evaluation
Overall, the background of each of the two examples of persona (Katharina, Gisela) offers important clues
about their story, such as the kind of farm they operate, what the farm produces (e.g. crops), what are the
personas intentions (e.g. efficiency, saving time with sensors). It tells also something about the relation of
the persona to the farm (a farm inherited from family or a farm run with the family), or about the issues
related with keeping up with digital technologies in the sector and online information. To evaluate the
validity of these narratives we will look at how the underlying themes appear and are composing the
personas. We will do so for the persona Katharina.
Table 5 and 6 show the theme-challenges used for building ‘Katharina’ and Table 7 and 8 the theme-
needs.
 Challenge        Navigating Online Information
 Description      This group contains topics related to the challenge of navigating through vast
                  amounts of online information to find relevant and accurate sources.
 Codes               Description                      Quote
 Filtering           The interviewee faces the        Usually I find a specific keyword and then add
 Information         challenge of filtering through another keyword to that and add another keyword
 Online              the vast amount of               to that. But I don't type in all the keywords at
                     information available online once. If you do it step by step, you get more
                     to find relevant and useful      information for every goal and you easily get the
                     information. They have           rubbish out.
                     developed a strategy of using
                     specific keywords and ruling
                     out advertisements to find
                     what they need.
 Filtering           The interviewee faces the        So I'm looking informations. And when I get
 Information         challenge of filtering           many results, I'm looking at who got this
 Online              information sources to ensure information. How did they get there? If it's still
                     the accuracy of the              trials, if it's a trial site or if it's only guesses and
                     information.                     maybe just a reflection of it could be like that.
 Filtering           The interviewee faces the        Misleading information can be digital or non-
 Information         challenge of filtering out       digital in this there is no difference. Because there
 Online              misleading information from is more digital information, there will be more
                     the internet, which can be       misleading ones.
                     both digital and non-digital.
 Navigating          The interviewee struggles        Reliability seems at first glance, and also when
 Information         with navigating through the      someone talks about something they've already
                     vast amount of information       tried. Once you have the routine, you can see what
                     available online to find         advertising is. Good infographics help with
                     reliable sources.                comprehension, but they are worth nothing if they
                                                      are not grounded, they are just advertising.


 Information         The challenge of sifting     Of course, if you go, for example, to Google and
 Overload            through a large amount of    you search something, you will have a lot of
                     search results to find the   outputs. So, it's very difficult to spot the right
                     right information.           ones, so sometimes it will take a lot of time
                                                  searching.
Table 5 – Theme-challenge ‘Navigating Online Information
 Challenge        Language Barriers
 Description      This group contains topics related to the challenge of language barriers faced by
                  farmers.
 Codes               Description                      Quote
 Language and        Difficulty accessing             The content must be available in the respective
 Education Barrier information due to language national languages and also for users with different
                     and education barriers           levels of education - not in all countries is
                                                      agricultural education as good as here in Germany.
 Language and        The challenge of language        Of course a farmer is also a firm manager and he's
 Education Barrier barriers for farmers who           has his own company and he needs to to manage
                     may not be proficient in         his company. So he needs to know about numbers,
                     foreign languages and need       about accountability, needs to know about politics.
                     access to information in their But it shouldn't take him out off core business,
                     local language.                  which is agronomy. So as a tool, must must help
                                                      the farmer and the user in that direction. So
                                                      learning a different language, I don't think it's it's
                                                      the best way to try to be helpful.
 Language and        The interviewee faces a          We mostly use Slovak or Hungarian, not everyone
 Education Barrier challenge of accessing             understands English. Perhaps the main information
                     information in languages         can be understood in German. Access to
                     other than Slovakian or          information is limited to these languages.
                     Hungarian.
 Language and        Difficulty in understanding      If I have to go and look for cultivation problems,
 Education Barrier technical terms in English         in English there is no way I can do it.
                     while searching for
                     cultivation problems online
 Language and        The interviewee only looks       On our websites we have a lot of information but
 Education Barrier for information in Polish,         time to time we are checking abroad website and
                     limiting access to potentially translating it because some websites are better than
                     valuable information in          polish. For example some Belgium webpages have
                     other languages.                 better information than polish.
Table 6 – Theme-challenge ‘Language Barriers’
 Need            Personalization and User-Friendliness
 Description     This group includes topics related to the need for a certain degree of personalization
                 based on what the user does or would like to have access to in terms of information. It
                 also includes the need for digital tools that are easy to use and accessible.
 Codes               Description                      Quote
 Personalization     The need for a certain           Yes. But I also immediately understand why this
                     degree of personalization        isn't possible for everyone. Some people may not
                     based on what the user does know how to configure such an app themselves.
                     or would like to have access
                     to in terms of information.
 User-Friendly       The need for digital tools       It should be user friendly...They don't have good
 Digital Tools       that are easy to use and         digital skills. And so everything should be very
                     accessible
                                                  intuitive. Yes, very easy tool to use. This is the
                                                  main argument.
Table 7 – Theme-need ‘Personalization and User-Friendliness’


 Need            Animal Health and Farming Issues
 Description     This group includes topics related to finding solutions to animal health and farming
                 issues, optimizing work to prevent waste in the company, and monitoring and
                 tracking poultry health and mortality rates.
 Codes               Description                    Quote
 Information         The need to discover new       Steal with your eyes to learn how someone else
 Discovery           information and techniques does it, and what you can do better yourself.
                     related to farming and
                     animal husbandry.
 Problem Solving     The need to find solutions     For example, let's take the (lack of) fertility of the
                     to problems related to         animals. We talked about it with our vet. He drew
                     animal health and farming      blood and sent a blood sample to the lab. They
                     practices.                     examined it and found that the cows had a deficit of
                                                    a certain mineral.
 Problem Solving     The need to effectively        I do had a situation when the field was...
                     solve problems using digital
                     tools and platforms.
 Problem Solving     The need to optimize work      My opinion is that digital sources can help optimize
                     in the company and avoid       work in the company. If you have tools that allows
                     waste                          you to work better, the entrepreneur works better,
                                                    the employees and the company works better and
                                                    so on. Maybe you also avoid a lot of waste.
 Fauna               The need to manage fauna       Roe Deer? They seem strange things. How to drive
 Management          in a way that is effective     away the Roe Deer because objectively there are no
                     and humane                     resources for you... they only sell you products. But
                                                    maybe, for example, this is something that if there
                                                    were answers in Europe on how to manage the
                                                    fauna, it would be interesting because everyone
                                                    have an experience.
 Optimization        The need to optimize work      My opinion is that digital sources can help optimize
                     in the company and avoid       work in the company. If you have tools that allows
                     waste                          you to work better, the entrepreneur works better,
                                                    the employees and the company works better and
                                                    so on. Maybe you also avoid a lot of waste.
 Monitoring and      The need to monitor and        For mortality and temperature, I made a Google
 Tracking            track poultry health and       Sheets. I monitor these and then I make the charts, I
                     mortality rates to identify    make them myself.
                     potential problems and
                     make informed decisions.
Table 8 – Theme-need ‘Animal Health and Farming Issues’
If we look back at Katharina, her goal and the quote come from the code ‘optimization’, in the theme-
need ‘Animal Health and Farming Issues’ (highlighted in light yellow, in Table 8). Information in the
background narrative of Katharina mentions aspects such as lack of language skills and the need for user
friendly tools which reflect both one of the challenges (Table 6) and one of the needs (Table 7). Specific
main needs and challenges of Katharina are also identifiable in the tables. For example, Katharina does
seem to have a strong focus on the navigation and identification of information. One of her challenges,
relates to filtering out misleading information from the Internet, is clearly reflected from one of the codes
in Table 5 (highlighted in green). One of her needs, related to finding information about animal health, is
clearly reflected in one of the ‘problem solving’ codes in Table 8 (highlighted in green). Language barriers
also is another challenge that she faces, and although all the codes in Table 7 may have contributed to this,
it is likely that that model used the one related to information in Polish (highlighted in green).




Discussion
The main goal of this paper was to conduct a TA with an LLM (GPT3.5-Turbo), covering also phase 6 of
the approach proposed by Braun & Clarke (2006), the writing of the results. In practical terms the goal
was to use a TA of semi-structured interviews to create user personas. In this discussion we will reflect
on the results of this research.
First, this research has been an opportunity to test again the embryonal and crude process for conducting
an inductive TA with an LLM, I proposed in my previous paper (De Paoli, 2023). Overall, this process
can be reproduced on different datasets and it is clear that it can deliver some meaningful (but still basic)
codes and themes. It certainly will need more work and refinement, but I consider it as a good initial basis
for reflection on how to conduct a TA with an LLM. In this paper I also covered in more detail phase 4,
where an evaluation of themes has been done and weak themes have been replaced with other themes
which appeared more valid and sound for the analysis. This clearly signals the fact that a TA with an LLM
is done within the frame of a Human-AI collaboration.
Second, using the themes produced from the process of analysis, it does seem that the LLM can indeed
write up the results, in this case in the form of user personas. With a formal prompt (which does not give
any indication about the content, except the structure) and a set of themes, the model can write up a persona
narrative. We have also seen (in one example) how specific codes are reflected in such a narrative,
including in the persona’s goal (and related quote), background or in the persona needs and challenges.
At this stage, it is difficult to tell in what ways the model prioritises certain codes over others for building
the narrative. However, this is a data driven process of writing up personas, and the personas are a
reasonable reflection of the data analysis, they are ‘fictional, yet realistic’ (Harley, 2015). I consider
therefore, that we can provide (at least initially) a positive answer to the problem of covering phase 6 of a
TA, as indeed also this phase can be attempted with an LLM.
Some words need also to be used to reflect on personas, the field of UCD and the use of LLMs. The
process I proposed here clearly is significantly different from the generation of entirely fictional personas,
which are not based on empirical data, which we often see in online tutorials. Those entirely fictional
personas clearly cannot be a good (‘yet realistic’) representation of target users, as they are not derived
from user research.
I would also argue that the personas generated by the LLM using a TA of semi-structured interviews, are
probably to be considered not finished personas, but more like initial prototypes, which would require
further refinement by the human analysts. Indeed, the model can generate multiple ideas for the personas,
by mixing themes (in my example I mixed 2 theme-needs and 2 theme-challenges, and this would allow
more than 6000 combinations), and then the analyst can decide which personas do seem more
representative of the target user group, and eventually also enrich them with further details, in line with
the proposed design work. In essence, I see the process more as an idea generation of personas, rather than
as a replacement for the work of the user researcher. The important aspect is that these ideas are generated
from real data and from a structured qualitative analysis and are not just entirely fictional.


Recommendations
In this section I offer some recommendations based on the results of this work and connect, where relevant,
some of these recommendations with previous literature.
Human-AI Collaboration. The conduction of a qualitative analysis with an LLM is a process of
collaboration between the model and the human analysts. This confirms the previous observations by Gao
et al (2023) and Jiang et al. (2021). However, we need to link the Human-AI collaboration better to what
could be the methodological implications for social sciences. Especially for the reporting of the methods
underpinning research. It is clearly not enough to state that an analysis was done with an LLM, and all the
steps taken by the model and by the human analyst in collaboration will also need to be reported and
documented in any methodology to ensure that validity of the results.
Prompting. Prompting is clearly the key element of using LLMs successfully (Xiao et al., 2023) and the
reporting of prompts will need to become a standard practice in methods section of social sciences, when
(and if) the analysis is done with an LLM. Moreover, practices for improving prompts will need to be
shared across the social sciences research community to improve the capacity to conduct qualitative
analysis, such as TA or the production of intermediate writing up of the results.
Coding. In phase 4 of the TA proposed in the previous pages, I have done an evaluation of the themes
and replaced weak themes with stronger ones. A similar evaluation, however, should also be conducted
in the codes generated at phase 2. Upon scrolling the list of codes, for example I found one code with a
truncated quote (this can be seen in Table 8, in one of the ‘Problem Solving’ codes) and one code with a
quote that was not very representative. There is in other words, room for improving the initial coding, and
it may be possible to envision also a process which relies on the randomness of the model for doing this.
However, this operation is clearly costly as it requires multiple processing of a dataset with the model.
Publishing. There is debate about the use of LLMs in academic publishing (see e.g. Thorp, 2023; Lund
et al., 2023). Whilst the use of these models in place of the human author (or for manipulating results)
should be rejected, it may be acceptable to use text written in a Human-AI collaboration, in the form of
intermediate products. For example, if user personas generated with the previous process (and then
enriched by the human analyst) are included in a UCD publication (and where the process is fully detailed
at methodological level), it may be acceptable for these types of intermediate textual products to be part
of a manuscript. However, entering in this debate is beyond the scope of my work.
Chat VS API. The few existing online tutorials and few other research contributions focusing on doing
qualitative/TA analysis with an LLM, use the web chat version of the model, which requires manually
copy-pasting content from a textual file into the chat and then copying back the response into other
documents, such as another text file. This procedure is not functional for the conduction of e.g a TA, since
it does not allow further data manipulation easily or to reuse the results of the analysis at scale. For
example, a TA done with the web chat, would end up in a e.g. text processor document, but this analysis
cannot be reused easily for the model to write up results, such as user personas, at scale.
API Vs Integration. While LLMs are starting to be integrated in Qualitative Data Analysis Software8
(which will limit probably the use of the web chat in the future), it remains unclear if these integrations
will offer transparency on what is done by the model. The use of the API (although requiring some basic
programming skills), offers, at least for now, a reasonable level of transparency, since all the steps
conducted for an analysis can be traced, and the outputs can be reconstructed. This is important for
methodological reasons and reporting.


Limits of this work
Potential Bias. For some reason, the large majority of the personas generated with the prompt (Figure 4),
resulted to be middle-aged. I am not sure the reason for this, but it may be that the model has a bias and
assumes people working in farming are all middle-aged. Therefore, the prompting I proposed may need
to be adjusted to specify if the persona needs to be young, middle-age or else. Moreover, many of the
personas appeared to be called Maria, and coming from Italy. In part this may be a bias of the model
(which I cannot prove) and in part this may be a reflection on the data seen by the model.
Two sets of themes. I built the personas deriving them from two set of themes (needs and challenges).
Clearly personas in UCD have more dimensions than two (e.g. behaviour, interests). However, my focus
was only demonstrative, to see if we could write up results of a TA in a way that is at least satisfactorily.
For writing more articulated personas (with more dimensions), more themes will need to be produced
from the analysis.
Phase 1. This phase of a TA would require the familiarisation with the data. At present this cannot be
done by the LLM due to the limitations in memory and tokens. We will have to assess in the future if more
powerful models can perform also this phase in the future.


Conclusion
This paper has shown that it is possible to perform phase 6 (writing up) of a Thematic Analysis with an
LLM, based on the results of a TA conducted on semi-structured interviews. A dataset of 14 user

8
    see se.g. https://atlasti.com/
interviews was analysed with an LLM to derive a set of needs and challenges as themes. These themes
were then used in a prompt to the model for building user personas. Two examples of personas were
presented, and one was evaluated against the underpinning themes. These personas, I would say, appear
‘fictional, yet realistic’. While the process for conducting a TA with an LLM is still crude, there clearly is
an initial basis for further work.




References
Braun, V. & Clarke, V. (2006). Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative Research in
Psychology. 3 (2), 77–101. https://doi.org/10.1191/1478088706qp063oa
Clarke, V., & Braun, V. (2013). Teaching thematic analysis: Overcoming challenges and developing
strategies for effective learning. The psychologist, 26(2), 120-123.
De Paoli S. (2023). Can Large Language Models emulate an inductive Thematic Analysis of semi-
structured interviews? An exploration and provocation on the limits of the approach and the model.
Available from: https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.13014
King, M. R., & ChatGPT. (2023). A conversation on artificial intelligence, chatbots, and plagiarism in
higher education. Cellular and Molecular Bioengineering, 16(1), 1-2. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12195-
022-00754-8
Kocaballi, A. B. (2023). Conversational ai-powered design: Chatgpt as designer, user, and product.
Available from: https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.07406
Floridi, L. (2023). AI as Agency without Intelligence: On ChatGPT, large language models, and other
generative models. Philosophy & Technology, 36(1), 15. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13347-023-00621-y
Gao, J., Guo, Y., Lim, G., Zhan, T., Zhang, Z., Li, T. J. J., & Perrault, S. T. (2023). CollabCoder: A
GPT-Powered Workflow for Collaborative Qualitative Analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.07366.
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2304.07366
Harley, A. (2015). Personas make users memorable for product team members. Nielsen Norman Group,
16. Available from: https://www.nngroup.com/articles/persona/
Jiang, J. A., Wade, K., Fiesler, C., & Brubaker, J. R. (2021). Supporting serendipity: Opportunities and
challenges for Human-AI Collaboration in qualitative analysis. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-
Computer Interaction, 5(CSCW1), 1-23. https://doi.org/10.1145/3449168
Laubheimer, P. (2020). Persona Types: Lightweight, Qualitative, and Statistical. Nielsen Norman
Group, 21(06), 2020. https://www.nngroup.com/articles/persona-scope/
Lund, B. D., Wang, T., Mannuru, N. R., Nie, B., Shimray, S., & Wang, Z. (2023). ChatGPT and a new
academic reality: Artificial Intelligence‐written research papers and the ethics of the large language
models in scholarly publishing. Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology.
74(5), 570-581 https://doi.org/10.1002/asi.24750

Miaskiewicz, T., & Kozar, K. A. (2011). Personas and user-centered design: How can personas benefit
product design processes?. Design studies, 32(5), 417-430. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.destud.2011.03.003

Nielsen, L., & Storgaard Hansen, K. (2014, April). Personas is applicable: a study on the use of personas
in Denmark. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp.
1665-1674).

Matthews, T., Judge, T., & Whittaker, S. (2012, May). How do designers and user experience
professionals actually perceive and use personas?. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human
factors in computing systems (pp. 1219-1228).

O'Connor, S. (2022). Open artificial intelligence platforms in nursing education: Tools for academic
progress or abuse?. Nurse Education in Practice, 66, 103537-103537.

Rosala, M. (2019). How to analyze qualitative data from UX research: Thematic analysis. NN-Nielsen
Norman Group. Available from: https://www.nngroup.com/articles/thematic-analysis/

Salazar, K. (2020). Just-right personas: How to choose the scope of your personas. Nielsen Norman
Group. Retrieved, 23, 2020. Available from: https://www.nngroup.com/articles/persona-scope/

Siemon, D. (2022). Elaborating team roles for artificial intelligence-based teammates in human-AI
collaboration. Group Decision and Negotiation, 31(5), 871-912. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10726-022-
09792-z

Thorp, H. H. (2023). ChatGPT is fun, but not an author. Science, 379(6630), 313-313.
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.adg7879

Turner, A. M., Reeder, B., & Ramey, J. (2013). Scenarios, personas and user stories: User-centered
evidence-based design representations of communicable disease investigations. Journal of biomedical
informatics, 46(4), 575-584. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2013.04.006

Szabolcs Vágó, & Pieter Spanoghe. (2023). EUREKA WP2: Regional Interview Transcripts [Data set].
Zenodo. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7571028

UK Government (2017). Learning about users and their needs. Available from:
https://www.gov.uk/service-manual/user-research/start-by-learning-user-
needs#:~:text='User%20needs'%20are%20the%20needs,so%20achieve%20their%20policy%20intent


Van der Cruyssen L. (2021). D2.3. Report on end-user archetypes, end-user journeys and validation
workshops. Available from https://eureknos-
eureka.fra1.digitaloceanspaces.com/production/deliverables/D2.3_Enduser_archetypes_journeys_WP2.p
df
Vössing, M., Kühl, N., Lind, M., & Satzger, G. (2022). Designing transparency for effective human-AI
collaboration. Information Systems Frontiers, 24(3), 877-895. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10796-022-
10284-3
Xiao, Z., Yuan, X., Liao, Q. V., Abdelghani, R., & Oudeyer, P. Y. (2023, March). Supporting
Qualitative Analysis with Large Language Models: Combining Codebook with GPT-3 for Deductive
Coding. In Companion Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces
(pp. 75-78).


Appendix – other examples of personas generated by the model based on the TA
 User Persona:

 Name: Giuseppe Rossi
 Age: Middle-aged
  Goal: To gather reliable information and connect with colleagues in the agricultural industry to
 optimize work in his company and avoid always cultivating the same crops.

 Background: Giuseppe Rossi is a farmer from Italy who has been in the agricultural industry for over
 25 years. He owns a medium-sized farm and has a team of employees who work for him. Giuseppe is
 interested in learning more about the latest developments in agriculture and how digital tools can help
 optimize his work. However, he faces challenges in accessing reliable information due to language
 barriers and limited network availability. He also struggles with finding a central platform for
 accessing information and knowledge related to agriculture. Giuseppe values personal and
 professional exchange with colleagues and representatives in order to gain trustworthy information
 and community connection within the agricultural industry.

 Main Needs:
  - Need to communicate and gather information in a language that is understood
  - Need for personal and professional exchange with colleagues and representatives in order to gain
 trustworthy information
  - Need for a platform to share knowledge and experiences in agriculture

 Main Challenges:
 - Language barriers for accessing information in foreign languages
 - Limited network availability and poorly maintained websites
 - Finding reliable sources of information in the digital age

 IT Skills: Medium
 Attitude toward digital innovation: Medium

 Quote: "Digital sources can help optimize work in the company. If you have tools that allow you to
 work better, the entrepreneur works better, the employees and the company work better and so on.
 Maybe you also avoid a lot of waste."
Persona: Anna, from Poland
Age: Middle age (between 40-60 years old)
Goal: To increase productivity and efficiency on her family-owned farm

Background: Anna is a middle-aged farmer from a rural town in Poland. She works on a family-
owned farm that produces a variety of crops and livestock. With the increasing use of technology in
agriculture, Anna has recognized the need to incorporate digital tools into her farming practices to
increase productivity and efficiency. She has some basic computer skills, but would like to learn
more about how digital tools can be implemented on her farm. Anna is also fluent in Polish but
struggles to find information in English or other languages.

Needs:
- Access to affordable digital tools and equipment
- Practical and efficient digital tools that aid in agricultural tasks and processes
- User-friendly and easily accessible digital tools that provide efficient information retrieval

Challenges:
- Language barriers when accessing information in foreign languages
- Limited access to reliable sources of information
- Difficulty in understanding technical terms in English when searching for solutions online

IT Skills: Low to medium
Attitude toward digital innovation: High

Quote representing the goal: "I want to incorporate digital tools on my farm to increase efficiency
and productivity, and to keep up with the changing agricultural industry.”



User Persona: Maria Rossi

Age: Middle-aged

Goal: Maria's main goal is to have access to trustworthy information and knowledge sharing platforms
to improve her farming practices.

Background: Maria Rossi is a small-scale farmer from Italy who has been working in agriculture for
over 20 years. She has a small farm where she grows vegetables and raises cattle. Maria is looking for
a platform where she can connect with other farmers and share her experiences to gain insight into
how she can improve her crop yield and livestock production. She is tired of the limited sources of
information available in her community and wants to learn from other farmers who are facing similar
challenges.
Main Needs:
- Personal and professional exchange with colleagues and representatives in the agricultural industry.
- Access to a platform for knowledge sharing in agriculture.
- Connection and community within the agricultural industry.

Main Challenges:
 - Navigating through the vast amount of online information available to find reliable sources and
avoid misleading information.
 - Identifying crop issues using digital tools and validating them in the field.
 - Limited availability of economically efficient digital tools.

IT Skills: Medium

Attitude toward Digital Innovation: Medium

Quote: "I would like to have much more information in one platform. I use a lot of Facebook. I use
Facebook more for work than to socialize. It is an easy way to follow the news from all the Italian
newspapers and also the international newspapers."



User Persona:

Name: Marta
Age: Late 30s
Country: Italy
Background: Marta inherited her family's farm, located in a small village in Southern Italy. Despite
having a degree in agriculture, she struggled to manage the farm and keep it up to date with the latest
technologies. She is now motivated to bring her farm back to its prime and generate more revenue,
but she has limited knowledge of digital tools and faces language barriers while searching for
technical information online.

Goal: To access personalized and user-friendly digital tools that can help her manage her farm
efficiently and access technical information in Italian.

Main Needs:
- Personalized information
- User-friendly digital tools
- Information in Italian

Main Challenges:
- Limited digital skills
- Language barriers while searching for technical information online

IT Skills: Low
Attitude towards digital innovation: Medium
Quote: "It should be user-friendly...They don't have good digital skills. And so everything should be
very intuitive. Yes, a very easy tool to use. This is the main argument."
