International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40593-024-00414-0

 ARTICLE



A Large Language Model Approach to Educational Survey
Feedback Analysis

Michael J. Parker1            · Caitlin Anderson1 · Claire Stone2 · YeaRim Oh2

Accepted: 8 June 2024
© The Author(s) 2024



Abstract
This paper assesses the potential for the large language models (LLMs) GPT-4 and
GPT-3.5 to aid in deriving insight from education feedback surveys. Exploration of
LLM use cases in education has focused on teaching and learning, with less explo-
ration of capabilities in education feedback analysis. Survey analysis in education
involves goals such as finding gaps in curricula or evaluating teachers, often requir-
ing time-consuming manual processing of textual responses. LLMs have the poten-
tial to provide a flexible means of achieving these goals without specialized machine
learning models or fine-tuning. We demonstrate a versatile approach to such goals
by treating them as sequences of natural language processing (NLP) tasks includ-
ing classification (multi-label, multi-class, and binary), extraction, thematic analy-
sis, and sentiment analysis, each performed by LLM. We apply these workflows
to a real-world dataset of 2500 end-of-course survey comments from biomedical
science courses, and evaluate a zero-shot approach (i.e., requiring no examples or
labeled training data) across all tasks, reflecting education settings, where labeled
data is often scarce. By applying effective prompting practices, we achieve human-
level performance on multiple tasks with GPT-4, enabling workflows necessary to
achieve typical goals. We also show the potential of inspecting LLMs’ chain-of-
thought (CoT) reasoning for providing insight that may foster confidence in practice.
Moreover, this study features development of a versatile set of classification catego-
ries, suitable for various course types (online, hybrid, or in-person) and amenable
to customization. Our results suggest that LLMs can be used to derive a range of
insights from survey text.

Keywords Large language model · Survey analysis · GPT-4 · GPT-3.5 · ChatGPT ·
Qualitative methodology




Extended author information available on the last page of the article


                                                                                  1  3
                                                                          Vol.:(0123456789)
                                         International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education


Introduction

Surveys in education have long been used for course evaluation and structured
evaluation of teaching (SET) (Diaz et al., 2022; Dommeyer et al., 2004). The his-
tory of education surveys has seen examination of the pros and cons, with some
noting the subjectivity of students’ perspectives and others pointing to the diffi-
culties in gathering responses unbiased by low response rates and the challenges
with analyzing qualitative survey responses in an objective way (McGourty et al.,
2002; Shah & Pabel, 2019; Spooren et al., 2013; Stowell et al., 2012; Wallace
et al., 2019; Wongsurawat, 2011). However, evidence has supported the valid-
ity of surveys, including qualitative and mixed methods approaches, for guid-
ing changes to teaching practice and course design (Ferren & Aylesworth, 2001;
Johnson & Onwuegbuzie, 2004; Lattuca & Domagal-Goldman, 2007; Marks
et al., 2017; McKeachie, 1997; Mentkowski, 1991; Spooren et al., 2013).
    Common use cases for end-of-course evaluations (the type we focus on in this
paper) include improving teaching and learning outcomes, measuring course qual-
ity, evaluating teachers, and informing decision-making (Diaz et al., 2022; Flodén,
2017; Marsh & Roche, 1993; Moss & Hendry, 2002; Schulz et al., 2014). Marsh
and Roche (1993) found that university teachers receiving feedback and evaluations
improved significantly more than a control group. Teachers can use feedback to tar-
get specific areas for improvement, with the potential to lead to structural course
changes (Flodén, 2017; Schulz et al., 2014). Flodén (2017) observed positive effects
of student feedback, tending to push teaching towards more interactive formats like
seminars and group work rather than lectures. Education administrators have used
feedback for quality assurance and to drive strategic decision-making (Ferren &
Aylesworth, 2001; Marginson & Considine, 2000; Mazzarol et al., 2003). The scope
is not limited to higher education. Student feedback surveys have played an increas-
ing role in teacher development and evaluation in K-12 in recent years (Schulz et al.,
2014). A large study found student surveys to be reliable and predictive of a teach-
er’s ability to improve student achievement (Kane et al., 2013).
    While quantitative feedback may have advantages for simplicity of analysis,
the qualitative feedback gathered through student comments has additional value.
In a higher education setting, Alhija and Fresko (2009) examined written student
comments from end-of-course evaluations. They found that qualitative comments
focused on the course, the instructor, and the context, capturing information not
found in quantitative ratings. Comments covered unique aspects and provided more
specific feedback on the strengths and weaknesses of a course. They concluded that
qualitative feedback can provide a more comprehensive view of a course’s teach-
ing. Shah and Pabel (2019) used qualitative student feedback comments to compare
the experiences of online and in-person students at their institution. Based on their
insights, they conclude that universities must analyze qualitative student comments,
not just quantitative ratings, to truly understand and enhance the student experi-
ence, especially given the growth in online education. The importance of qualitative
feedback has been examined across online, in-person, and blended or hybrid format
courses (Aldeman & Branoff, 2021; Alhija & Fresko, 2009; Onan, 2021a).


13
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education


   Despite the utility of qualitative student feedback, significant challenges remain
in putting its usage into practice (Richardson, 2005). Shah and Pabel (2019) note the
success in use of quantitative data but point to limited prior progress in the analy-
sis and practical use of qualitative feedback. Approaches for analysis have included
traditional, manual approaches such as thematic analysis that rely on manual effort
of annotating and coding survey responses (Braun & Clarke, 2006; Riger & Sig-
urvinsdottir, 2016). Manually coding and analyzing large volumes of open-ended
survey responses or student feedback comments is extremely time-consuming and
labor-intensive and may not always provide actionable suggestions for improvement
(Shaik et al., 2023; Mattimoe et al., 2021; Nanda et al., 2021; Shah & Pabel, 2019).
Maintaining consistent coding across large educational datasets can be challenging
when done manually, especially if multiple researchers are involved (Shaik et al.,
2023; Mattimoe et al., 2021).
   Employing crowdworkers, for example via Amazon’s Mechanical Turk platform,
reduces the cost and time of manual annotation of qualitative data but does not solve
some of the other issues. The quality of results may vary, particularly in cases where
some degree of domain expertise is needed (Gilardi et al., 2023; Rother et al., 2021).
Qualitative annotation tasks can be inherently subjective, leading to disagreements
among crowdworkers and low inter-annotator agreement (Pradhan et al., 2022;
Rother et al., 2021). In addition, a recent study (Veselovsky et al., 2023) provided
evidence that a substantial fraction of crowdworkers used generative AI (Large Lan-
guage Models, or LLMs) to assist with a summarization task, leading to a mix of
results from humans and LLMs and raising doubt that crowdworkers will continue
to be a reliable source of human annotations.
   More recently, automated methods for analysis of qualitative data have relied on
a variety of machine learning models, (Deepa et al., 2019; Onan, 2021b; Smith &
Humphreys, 2006; Zhang et al., 2020). Machine learning approaches (discussed fur-
ther below)—including unsupervised semantic mapping, topic modeling, and using
of different forms of neural networks—have been applied to a range of tasks like
clustering, summarization, entity extraction, and sentiment analysis (Gottipati et al.,
2018; Hamzah et al., 2020; Nanda et al., 2021; Patil et al., 2019; Shaik et al., 2023).
These approaches have shown promise in aiding analysis, but often require condi-
tions that make their use less feasible to most educators, such as the need for signifi-
cant technical resources, fine-tuning of models on volumes of pre-existing labeled
data, use of separate models for the natural language processing tasks involved
(impeding broader analyses), or the need for use of specialized software (Fan et al.,
2015; Gottipati et al., 2018; Orescanin et al., 2023; Pyasi et al., 2018; Smith & Hum-
phreys, 2006). These models have therefore generally been the domain of research,
with a gap in widely accessible, practical methods for qualitative analysis of end-of-
course surveys.
   Large language models with generative AI capabilities have become more widely
available, capable, and accessible (easier-to-use) in the last one to two years, but are
underexplored in terms of use in survey analysis versus more specialized machine
learning models. LLMs have the potential to circumvent many of the problems
associated with specialized machine learning approaches and potentially democra-
tize access to high quality qualitative survey analysis. For example, the ability to

                                                                             13
                                          International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education


use such models through natural language instructions, via simple web interfaces,
or at scale through application programming interfaces (APIs), lessens the need for
dedicated machines or expensive software. However, a thorough analysis of the fea-
sibility and evaluation of the quality of LLMs’ results has not been performed to
establish reliability and rigor in common qualitative survey analysis tasks. Our main
research question was: are large language models are at a stage where they can be
effectively used across the broad range of tasks that are part of survey analysis? To
answer this main question, we propose the following related research questions:

• Research question 1 (RQ1): Can LLMs be used to perform multiple unstruc-
  tured text analysis tasks on educational survey responses, including multi-label
  classification, multi-class classification, binary classification, extraction, induc-
  tive thematic analysis, and sentiment analysis?
• Research question 2 (RQ2): Can LLMs’ chain-of-thought (a demonstration of
  the intermediate steps of how they arrive at their answers) be captured to provide
  a degree of transparency that may help foster confidence in real world usage?
  Can we demonstrate examples that show the potential for this use case?
• Research question 3 (RQ3): Is a zero-shot approach (not needing to provide
  hand-labeled examples) across all tasks, a scenario that mimics many real-world
  practical use cases in the education setting, capable of achieving performance
  comparable to human annotation?

  As part of the evaluation process, we also developed a set of classification cat-
egories that can be applied to a variety of course types (online, hybrid, or in-person),
and which are amenable to customization depending on specific requirements.


Background

Types of Tasks Associated with Analysis of Unstructured Survey Data

Analyzing survey textual responses to explore the high-level goals of educational
stakeholders requires chaining together natural language processing (NLP) tasks in
the form of workflows. Such workflows can be implemented with NLP tasks, includ-
ing classification, extraction, and sentiment analysis, that form composable building
blocks for similar workflows.
   Classification of comments may be single-label (binary or multi-class, the latter
involving classifying into one of a set of tags) or multi-label (classification of each
comment with one or more of a set of tags). The tags (also called labels, classes, or
categories) are frequently custom-chosen, reflecting the goals of a particular analysis
(Goštautaitė & Sakalauskas, 2022). Often those doing the analysis have a specific
objective or goal focus that they are investigating (e.g., suggestions for improve-
ment), and text extraction is a useful technique for this purpose. Sentiment analysis
can be used to lend nuance and insight to the quantitative ratings that are gathered
through Likert scales or “star” ratings (Gottipati et al., 2017; Nitin et al., 2015).
   A high-level breakdown of objectives and NLP tasks is shown in Table 1.

13
     Table 1  NLP tasks that may be used for analysis of textual survey responses
     Objective                                 Question                                 NLP Tasks                                 Notes

     High-level initial analysis               What did students say (and how did they Multi-label classification, inductive      Depends on whether analysis is top-down
                                                feel about the course)?                 thematic analysis, sentiment analysis      (using pre-determined labels or areas
                                                                                                                                   of interest) or bottom-up (deriving
                                                                                                                                                                               International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education



                                                                                                                                   themes from scratch based on student
                                                                                                                                   comments)
     Answering a focused question              What did students say about x (particular Extraction                               Results are amenable to multi-class clas-
                                                focus)?                                                                            sification or inductive thematic analysis
     Quantification of textual survey          How many comments were there on          Classification (binary, multi-label, or   Helps the person performing analysis find
      responses                                 each aspect?                             multi-class)                              themes of greater importance




13
                                         International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education


   For discussion on the background of automated means of qualitative survey anal-
ysis, it is helpful to divide methods into those developed prior to the broad avail-
ability of the most recent generative AI versus those that make use of the recent
generative AI advances in the form of LLMs. It is a potentially useful simplification
to think of the pre-generative AI approaches as “language in, numbers out” and the
later generative AI approaches as “language in, language out” in terms of how one
interacts with the models. These approaches are distinguished below.


Previous Machine Learning Approaches and Challenges in Analyzing Education
Feedback

For feature extraction from text, techniques like TF-IDF, and Word2Vec have been
applied for short text classification and sentiment analysis (Deepa et al., 2019;
Devlin et al., 2018; Onan, 2021a; Zhang et al., 2020). Topic modeling using latent
semantic analysis or latent Dirichlet allocation has been useful for discovering
themes and trends in collections of student feedback (Cunningham-Nelson et al.,
2019; Perez-Encinas & Rodriguez-Pomeda, 2018; Unankard & Nadee, 2020). For
evaluating text, sentiment analysis techniques like CNN and Bi-LSTM models
have been used to classify student evaluations (Sindhu et al., 2019; Sutoyo et al.,
2021). Overall, these techniques have shown utility for gaining insights from student
feedback.
   With the advent of recent machine learning (ML) techniques, great strides have
been made in dealing with unstructured text. BERT (Bidirectional Encoder Rep-
resentations from Transformers, Devlin et al., 2018) and related models allow for
transformation of text passages into numerical formats (high dimensional dense vec-
tors called embeddings) that are then amenable to classification via conventional ML
methods such as logistic regression. Good results have been achieved in certain con-
texts using such models (Meidinger & Aßenmacher, 2021). Despite such advances,
challenges remain that present obstacles to routine use of such models in practice.
   Specialized ML models often require a “fine-tuning” process using labeled data
(data that human annotators have classified) to best adapt to a specific use case.
Depending on the amount of human labeling needed, this aspect may provide a stum-
bling block based on the time and effort involved. Although there are many examples
of labeled datasets (Papers With Code datasets, n.d.; Hugging Face datasets, n.d.;
Kastrati et al., 2020a, b), real-world use cases often rely on custom labels for which
there is no pre-existing labeled data for fine-tuning. Even supposing such fine-tuning
takes place, there are additional barriers to practical use of this technology.
   One such barrier is that multiple distinct AI models may be needed, depending on
the range of tasks. The model that is suitable for classification may not be the same
one that performs text extraction, and each model may need its own fine-tuning or
adaptation.
   Even for a core task like classification, there are a number of challenges. Diffi-
culty of classification increases in situations where multiple labels may concurrently
be assigned to the same survey comment, often leading to a degree of inter-rater dis-
agreement even among highly-skilled human annotators who have high familiarity

13
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education


with the domain. Other challenges include data imbalance, multi-topic comments,
and domain-specific terminology (Edalati et al., 2022; Shaik et al., 2022).
   In classifying unstructured textual feedback, data imbalance exists when the
labels chosen are not attributable in equal proportions across a dataset; some labels
may be comparatively rare. If there are few examples of particular labels, this scar-
city can create difficulties in training machine learning models that classify new
comments. If human labeling is being used as ground truth, rarity of certain labels
may require labeling a larger set of feedback to enable training an ML classifier.
Techniques addressing data imbalance include synthesizing new training examples
for the minority class through data augmentation or by oversampling the minority
class instances through techniques like SMOTE (Kennedy et al., 2024). Other meth-
ods involve modifying the learning algorithms to assign higher misclassification
costs to minority class examples, such that the model parameters are affected more
by rare class examples, and ensemble methods trained on resampled versions of the
data (Johnson & Khoshgoftaar, 2019; Shah & Ali, 2023).
   Another challenge is that of multi-topic comments. Depending on how feed-
back is collected and how open-ended the survey questions are, students may pro-
vide feedback that encompasses multiple topics (for example, “I found the quizzes
incredibly difficult, but the teacher was great and I felt I got what I paid for. If I had
had more time to complete the course, this would have been even better.”). Such
multi-topic comments present a challenge for ML techniques based on embeddings
(dense vector representations) derived from models such as BERT (or BERT related,
such as Sentence-BERT, Reimers & Gurevych, 2019), given that the embedding of
a comment is related to the comment’s semantic meaning. A comment with multi-
ple topics may have an embedding that doesn’t adequately localize to the seman-
tic “neighborhood” of any of the individual topics associated with that comment,
decreasing the performance of downstream classifiers.
   Use of context-specific, specialized terms in the text data, known as domain-spe-
cific language, can also decrease the performance of ML techniques. Deep learning
models like BERT that perform feature selection by creating embeddings have been
pre-trained on a large corpus of text, usually publicly accessible and mostly from the
internet. Depending on the pre-training, terms specific to a specialized domain such
as immunology or biomedical engineering may not have been seen during training,
or seen only in very limited quantities. In those cases, the pre-trained model cannot
adequately capture the semantics of such terms via its embeddings, again impact-
ing the performance of downstream applications such as classification and cluster-
ing that may rely on those embeddings. For example, Lee et al. (2020) discuss how
the original BERT was pre-trained on general domain corpora like Wikipedia and
BookCorpus, which lack sufficient technical biomedical vocabulary and writing
styles. This leads to poor performance on biomedical NLP tasks. Gu et al. (2021)
analyze how continual pre-training of BERT on biomedical corpora like PubMed
abstracts and PMC full-text articles significantly improves performance on down-
stream biomedical tasks compared to the general BERT model. The key reasons
cited for why BERT models may struggle with domain-specific language are the
lack of domain-specific vocabulary, writing conventions, and linguistic patterns
in the original BERT pre-training corpus, which leads to poor representations for

                                                                               13
                                         International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education


technical terminology and jargon when applied to domain tasks without additional
in-domain pre-training.
   In sentiment analysis, pre-trained sentiment analysis models may not adapt well
to settings where it is important to take into account the context. For example, in
analyzing comments from biomedical science courses that cover cancer as a topic,
learners’ comments may include the words ‘cancer’ or ‘oncology’ or ‘tumor’, simply
as referring to parts of the curriculum. These comments may end up being classified
as negative even by a state-of-the-art existing model, given that discussions of can-
cers and tumors in many training datasets (often from internet settings) may be in
the context of negative emotions being expressed.
   Finally, a common challenge is that of lack of interpretability of results coming
from specialized machine learning models (Hassija et al., 2024). Although there
has been significant work on approaches like visualizing factors that contribute to
a neural network-based model’s predictions, complex models may still be viewed
as “black boxes” by downstream users in areas like education, with this perception
potentially inhibiting usage.


LLM Background and Related Research

Education feedback analysis seeks to extract insights from open-ended written
responses, such as student surveys or teacher evaluations, and automated techniques
can be seen as a particular application of the broader field of natural language pro-
cessing (Shaik et al., 2022). The introduction of transformer-based neural network
architectures in 2017 led to an explosion of new AI models for NLP with increas-
ing capabilities. BERT (mentioned above) was developed shortly thereafter (2018),
with multiple related models (e.g., RoBERTa) being further developed over the last
five years, with effectiveness at various NLP tasks that often exceeded those of pre-
transformer models. Such models have been applied to a wide range of tasks, both
with fine-tuning and without.
    Large language models are neural networks based on transformer architectures,
including not only those in the BERT lineage but also other models such as GPT-
2, GPT-3, T5, and many others, with tremendous scale in terms of the number of
model parameters (billions and sometimes trillions) and the internet scale volume
of text on which they are trained (billions or even trillions of tokens, with tokens
being numerical representations of words or parts of words). BERT (the large vari-
ant) has approximately 345 million parameters and was trained on about 3.3 billion
words; in comparison, GPT-3 has 175 billion parameters and was trained on approx-
imately 500 billion tokens (approximately 375 billion words). Models like GPT-3.5
and GPT-4 are proprietary, and the number of parameters and the amount of training
data are unknown, although there are estimates that GPT-4 uses approximately 1.8
trillion parameters and was trained on approximately 13 trillion tokens, with GPT-
3.5 somewhere in between GPT-3 and GPT-4 (Schreiner, 2023).
    It is important as well to distinguish between BERT, along with related models like
RoBERTa and SentenceTransformers, and generative models like GPT-3.5 and GPT-
4. While all of these are transformer models (a type of neural network architecture),

13
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education


BERT is known as an “encoder-only” model, more suitable for feature extraction, clus-
tering, and a variety of use cases making use of the resulting embeddings (numeri-
cal representations of language, discussed above). The GPT models and other recent
generative models are “decoder-only, auto-regressive” models, with different strengths,
including the ability to generate complex text. These models are also trained on an
order of magnitude more text, which lends to their capabilities as well.
   These generative AI models have the capability to do tasks like summarization,
translation, and generation of high-quality text output. As their scale has grown, the
range of tasks of which they have shown to be capable has increased, along with a
level of performance that has surprised many. With the recent popularization and
wider spread availability of LLMs, in part due to ChatGPT, with its underlying
GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 models, as well as other LLMs like Claude (Anthropic), Com-
mand (Cohere), Bard/Gemini (Google), Llama (Meta), and a range of open-source
models, interest has grown in applying these to use cases like analysis of short text
comments such as are seen in Tweets (Törnberg, 2023), customer feedback, and sur-
vey feedback (Jansen et al., 2023; Masala et al., 2021).
   Multiple recent studies have examined using ChatGPT for text annotation and
classification tasks, with mixed results based on variations in prompts, datasets,
parameters, and complexity of tasks. Reiss (2023) focused on sensitivity to the
prompts and parameters used in classification, in the context of performing classi-
fication on a German dataset. Pangakis et al. (2023) argues that researchers using
LLMs for annotation must validate against human annotation to show that LLMs are
effective for particular tasks and types of datasets, given that there is variation in the
quality of prompts, the complexity of the data, and the difficulty of the tasks. Other
studies (Gilardi et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2023) demonstrate the potential for Chat-
GPT to perform text annotation or provide natural language explanations at levels
approaching or matching those of humans.
   Despite explorations like those mentioned above, research to date has not focused
on the feasibility and quality of LLMs’ results in performing a broad array of com-
mon qualitative education survey analysis tasks, leaving a gap that we focus on in
this study. For example, a review published in 2024 focusing on natural language
processing of students’ feedback to instructors makes no mention of studies using
LLMs for this purpose (Sunar & Khalid, 2024). Prior work has primarily focused on
the use of encoder models like BERT for their clustering and feature extraction capa-
bilities and have not explored the current generation of decoder-only auto-regressive
models like the GPT models mentioned above. Our contribution is to explore and
evaluate the capabilities of the most recent generation of LLMs for educational sur-
vey feedback analysis.


Methods

Survey Data Used for Evaluation

2,500 survey responses (625 for each of four open-ended questions) were selected
at random from a larger set of survey responses (50,525 total responses as of April

                                                                               13
                                         International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education


16, 2023, when data collection was performed, with 14,359 responses for Q1 (see
below), 13,654 responses for Q2 (see below), 12,825 responses for Q3 (see below),
and 9,687 responses for Q4 (see below)) received as end-of-course feedback on a
range of online biomedical science courses. The courses included 365 course itera-
tions total across 15 different courses (e.g. Pharmacology, Genetics, Immunology,
etc.). An additional 2,000 survey comments were chosen as a development set that
could be used for LLM prompt tuning. The courses all use a single, uniform end-
of-course survey. In addition to quantitative ratings (e.g., net promoter scores) and
optional demographic data, the survey included open-ended text responses to four
questions/directives:

– “Please describe the best parts of this course.” [Q1]
– “What parts of the experience enhanced your learning of the concepts most?”
  [Q2]
– “What can we do to improve this course?” [Q3]
– “Please provide any further suggestions, comments, or ideas you have for this
  series.” [Q4]

   On average, learners answered approximately two of the four questions. The
shortest responses containing content were one word, and the longest responses
were several paragraphs. Example survey responses are shown in Table 2.
   Survey responses were collected via Qualtrics, with minor processing with Pan-
das 2.0.1 for elimination of leading and trailing white space and automated removal
of responses with no content (NA or None variants).
   Survey responses were inspected manually and via named entity recognition
(NER), running locally, to ensure that no private or sensitive information was trans-
mitted to publicly available LLMs.


Development of Course Tagging System

We spent considerable time developing and testing a set of labels that would work
well not only for online courses like those that the survey responses in this paper
were a part of, but also other types of educational offerings. The motivation for the
choice of labels was based on the functional areas of the team creating and deliv-
ering the courses. This team had separate functions (sub-teams) for curriculum/
teaching, logistics and operations (e.g. enrollment and technical aspects of course
delivery), creative media/visual asset development (art and video creation), tech-
nology (learning management system and platform development and maintenance),
administration/leadership (analysis of feedback for improvement and future feature/
course requests), and support (solving learner issues and handling inquiries). While
most course teams at universities or online learning providers may not have all these
functions separately, they are generally present in some fashion even if a single indi-
vidual (for example, an instructor) covers multiple functions. Tags were therefore
designed to cover functional areas and enable identification of feedback of interest
for each team’s quality improvement and planning processes.

13
     Table 2  Example actual survey responses
     [Q1] responses                     [Q2] responses                                  [Q3] responses                                    [Q4] responses

     “The teachers they are incred-     “the whole concept, the short videos with the    “Implement more checkpoints that review previ-   “I really enjoyed the course and
      ible and their fascination          explanations written down and then the interac- ous material throughout the course.”              learned a lot of applicable
      about this topic make it more       tive modules”                                                                                     information for my job. I would
      interesting.”                                                                                                                         have like a little more time
                                                                                                                                            between new releases of infor-
                                                                                                                                            mation. It would also be nice
                                                                                                                                                                              International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education



                                                                                                                                            to have a live question/answer
                                                                                                                                            session.”
     “the structure of this course is   “The quizzes after each module made me think    “The course was fantastic and informative.        “A visit to meet the tutors and a
       just great. however i would       about the material I just learned.”             However, I had to rewatch the videos several       summary discussion on loca-
       love to have the chance to                                                        times to write down everything that is said. I     tion would be fabulous—I am
       repeat all the modules as                                                         learn best by looking at the words. The videos     aware not many people would
       i am from a very different                                                        should come with either a transcript or writ-      make it, but a thought nonethe-
       background.”                                                                      ten words or some sort that convey the same        less.”
                                                                                         information”




13
                                                   International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education


   The label development process started with a much larger set of labels (71 total).
Given that each survey response could cover multiple topics, the task was to assign
as many labels to each survey response as were applicable (a multi-label classifica-
tion task). The four authors (all of whom have been involved in either course devel-
opment or delivery for multiple years and can be considered domain experts in the
course resources and processes) each labeled a test set of 2,000 survey responses
(from the same educational program overall, but distinct from the set of 2,500 com-
ments ultimately labeled), with resulting relatively low inter-rater agreement. Based
on this experiment, tag categories were combined to arrive at a much smaller set of
generalizable tags (see Table 3). These were still applied in a multi-label classifica-
tion approach, with each survey response potentially receiving multiple labels. For
example, the example comment mentioned earlier (“I found the quizzes incredibly
difficult, but the teacher was great and I felt I got what I paid for. If I had had more
time to complete the course, this would have been even better.”) might simultane-
ously receive labels of “assessment”, “teaching”, and “course logistics and fit”. In
addition, best practices were followed to ensure generalizability (University of Wis-
consin—Madison, n.d.; UC Berkeley Center for Teaching & Learning, n.d.; Bren-
nan & Williams, 2004; Medina et al., 2019).
   A one to three sentence description of each tag was created to provide guidance
so that tags could be applied appropriately in testing rounds. The intent is also that
others can adapt these same tags by modifying the description portion for their own


Table 3  Final tags and descriptions
Tag                           Description

Course logistics and fit      course delivery (policy, support), cost, difficulty, time commitment,
                                grading, credit, schedule, user fit, access, background (e.g., prereqs and
                                appropriateness of course level)
Curriculum                    course content, curriculum, specific topics, course structure. This focuses
                                on the content and the pedagogical structure of the content, including
                                flow and organization. This also includes applied material such as clinical
                                cases and case studies. Includes references to pre-recorded discussions
                                between experts or between a doctor and a patient. Includes specific sug-
                                gestions for additional courses or content
Teaching modality             video, visual, interactive, animation, step-by-step, deep dive, background
                                builder (the format rather than the content/topic)
Teaching                      instructors, quality of teaching and explanations
Assessment                    quizzes, exams
Resources                     note taking tools, study guides, notepads, readings. Includes other potential
                                static resources like downloadable video transcripts
Peer and teacher interaction includes chances for the student to interact with another person in the
                               course (teacher or student). This includes discussion forums, teacher-
                               student or student–student interactions. Includes requests for live sessions
                               with teachers or live office hours
Other                         catch-all for the rarer aspects that we’ll encounter and also the ‘na’, ‘thank
                                you’, etc. comments that don’t really belong in the above bins. Also for
                                sufficiently general comments like ‘all the course was terrific’ that can’t
                                be narrowed down to one of the other categories



13
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education


purposes. The same descriptions that served as context for the human annotators
were also used in the prompts for the LLMs in the multi-label classification task as a
form of deductive thematic analysis.
   We then iteratively tested the new, much smaller set of tags on several sets of 100
survey responses, with all four authors independently tagging the same entries, fol-
lowed by examination of inter-rater agreement. This yielded good results. With this
set of tags, we then independently labeled 2,500 survey responses, and evaluated
inter-rater agreement using Jaccard similarity coefficient between pairs of raters and
averaged across all pairs of raters. Jaccard similarity was chosen because it is one of
the most common metrics for multi-label classification. Other common multi-label
classification metrics (e.g., Hamming distance) were also calculated and are pro-
vided in the appendix (see discussion of metrics below).


LLM Processing

All LLM tasks were performed via calls to the OpenAI API endpoints. GPT-3.5
(model: gpt-3.5-turbo-0301) and GPT-4 (model: gpt-4–0314) were used for the
multi-label classification task; all other tasks described used GPT-3.5 (model: gpt-
3.5-turbo-0613) and GPT-4 (model: gpt-4–0613). All tests were run with calls to the
models’ asynchronous endpoints and used a temperature of 0 with other parameters
set to their default values, other than the functions parameter and the function_call
parameter, which were set to specify the applicable function schema and the func-
tion name where applicable. “Function calling”, a capability specific to these mod-
els, was used to generate the JSON structured output for all tasks. Prompts used (see
Electronic Supplement) involved function schemas, as well as the system and user
messages to the model.
    For the LLM approach to the multi-label classification task, the multi-class clas-
sification task for extracted excerpts, the binary classification task, and the sentiment
analysis task, zero-shot chain-of-thought (CoT) prompting was used (where a model
is prompted to reason step-by-step but without examples of such reasoning pro-
vided) (Kojima et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2022). In addition to use of CoT enhancing
the accuracy of the model output, the reasoning was included in the output to allow
for error analysis and prompt tuning, as well as to allow inspection of the model’s
reasoning, something potentially helpful for those using the results in practice. For
sentiment analysis, we had the LLM output a sentiment classification based on the
possible categories ‘negative’, ‘slightly negative’, ‘neutral’, ‘slightly positive’, and
‘positive’, along with its reasoning.
    For the LLM approach to inductive thematic analysis of survey responses, a two-
step approach was used. The first step involved prompting the LLM to derive themes
representing feedback from multiple students and summarize the themes. This step
was run in parallel on batches of survey responses that would fit within the model’s
context window. The second step involved prompting the LLM to coalesce derived
themes based on similarity to arrive at a final set of themes and descriptions. These
steps could be considered analogous to part of the human inductive thematic analy-
sis qualitative analysis workflow (Braun & Clarke, 2006).

                                                                              13
                                         International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education


  Various prompting techniques were used to improve the results. These included:

1) Zero-shot CoT—This technique involves asking the model to think step-by-step
   to arrive at a correct result and to provide its detailed reasoning. In the absence
   of providing examples of CoT reasoning in the prompt, this type of prompting is
   categorized as zero-shot.
2) Prompt tuning via inspection of CoT reasoning—In testing, error analysis was
   supplemented with inspection of CoT reasoning to help discern where prompts
   might need refinement. As prompts were updated, we observed corresponding
   changes in the output and the stated reasoning, with improvement in the develop-
   ment set metrics.
3) Additional descriptive context for labels—Given that there was no fine-tuning
   to allow the model to learn the appropriate context and meaning of labels, we
   added context to prompts in the form of definitions for each label and the types
   of elements for which each label applied.
4) Additional context through injection of the survey questions into the prompt—
   Inclusion of additional context, such as the survey question that a given comment
   is in reply to, may improve the performance of LLMs and was used in this study.
5) Use of function calling for reliable structured output—This technique is specific
   to the GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 models, for which models from the June 2023 check-
   point (0613) onward have been fine-tuned to enable structured output (e.g., JSON)
   when provided with information about a function schema that could be called
   with the output.
6) Memetic proxy, also known as the persona pattern (Reynolds & McDonell, 2021;
   White et al., 2023)—Asking the LLM to act as a certain persona, for example as
   an expert in survey analysis tasks, has been described as another way to improve
   results, potentially by helping the model access a portion of its memory that holds
   higher quality examples of the task at hand.

Other Models

In addition to comparison to human ground truth labels, for multi-label classifica-
tion, comparison was made to SetFit (Tunstall et al., 2022), a SentenceTransformers
finetuning approach based on Sentence-BERT and requiring very little labeled data;
for sentiment analysis, comparison was made to a publicly available RoBERTa-
based model trained on 124 M Tweets. Both are encoder-only models (distinct from
generative AI models like GPT-4 and GPT-3.5), with the embeddings used in fine-
tuning to enable classification. These comparisons provide some context for the
LLMs’ performance relative to recent specialized models.

Evaluation Metrics

Scikit-learn 1.2.0 was used for statistical tests, along with numpy 1.23.5 and Pandas
2.0.1 for data analysis. Weights & Biases was used for tracking of model evaluation
results.

13
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education


   For the multi-label classification task, model results were compared to the
human ground truth labels. Two ways were used to arrive at ground truth labels
aggregating results from multiple annotators: 1) using consensus rows: only the
subset of survey responses (dataset rows) where all four annotators had majority
agreement on all selected tags were kept; and 2) using consensus labels: all sur-
vey responses were kept but only labels with majority agreement were chosen as
selected.
   To fine-tune the SetFit model, we used a portion of each ground truth dataset
(the first 20 examples for each label). Those examples were omitted from the test
set, leaving 2,359 rows in the consensus labels test set and 1,489 rows in the con-
sensus rows test set.
   For each of the above scenarios, model results for multi-label classification
were evaluated against aggregated human annotator results via the following met-
rics: 1) Jaccard similarity coefficient, comparing the model against aggregated
human results for each row (survey response) and then averaged over all rows; 2)
average precision per tag; 3) average recall per tag; 4) macro average precision,
recall, and F1 score across all tags; 5) micro average precision, recall, and F1
score across all tags; 6) Hamming loss; and 7) subset accuracy.
   For the binary classification task, accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 score
were calculated, comparing the model results to one expert human annotator.
   For the extraction task, extracted excerpts were evaluated by GPT-4 using a
rubric created specifically for this task, examining performance on multiple
aspects of performance, including the presence of excerpts that were not exact
quotes from the original (part of the original extraction instructions), the com-
pleteness of capturing relevant excerpts, the presence of excerpts irrelevant to the
initial goal focus, the inclusion of relevant context from the original comment,
and several others. The results were also evaluated by human annotation to deter-
mine the presence of hallucinations (excerpts that were substantial changes from
the original survey responses, rather than just changes in punctuation, spelling, or
capitalization), with the percent of the total number of excerpts representing hal-
lucinations being reported.
   For the inductive thematic analysis task, there is not an accepted evaluation
method given that this is a complex, compound task, and evaluation consisted of
inspecting the derived themes and descriptions as well as inspecting the results of
the associated multi-label classification step.
   The sentiment analysis results of GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 were compared to those
of a RoBERTa sentiment classifier trained on ~ 124 million tweets (Hugging Face
cardiffnlp/twitter-roberta-base-sentiment-latest, 2022; Loureiro et al., 2022), as well
as to results from a human annotator, with accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 scores
reported for the prediction of sentiment as negative, neutral, or positive. Comparison
was made by grouping ‘negative’ and ‘slightly negative’ into a single class, keep-
ing ‘neutral’ as its own class, and grouping ‘positive’ and ‘slightly positive’ into a
single class to allow for comparison across sentiment analysis methods. The RoB-
ERTa classifier produced a dictionary with negative, neutral, and positive classes,
with probabilities summing to 1.0. The class with the maximum probability score
was chosen as the label for comparison to the human annotations.

                                                                            13
                                          International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education


Results

In this section, we organize the results in relation to the three research questions. The
first research question pertains to whether LLMs can perform multiple text analysis
tasks on unstructured survey responses, including multi-label classification, multi-
class classification, binary classification, extraction, inductive thematic analysis, and
sentiment analysis. The section below on the approach to LLM workflows answers
this research question. The second research question explores whether LLMs’ chain-
of-thought (a demonstration of the intermediate steps of how they arrive at their
answers) can be captured to provide a degree of transparency that may help foster
confidence in real world usage. In the section below on chain-of-thought reasoning,
we demonstrate examples that show the potential for this use case. The final research
question asks whether a zero-shot approach (not needing to provide hand-labeled
examples) across all tasks can achieve performance comparable to human annota-
tion. The section below on individual NLP task evaluations answers this research
question.
    For the examples, we use GPT-4 as the LLM; the evaluations compare GPT-4
and GPT-3.5 as well as the other models used.

Approach to LLM Workflows

The main types of workflows demonstrated support the goals shown in Table 1 of
1) high-level analysis, in which the desire is to understand the main categories and
areas of emphasis across all student feedback, or 2) more focused analysis, e.g.,
answering specific questions about a particular aspect of a course. In both cases,
quantification of results is a consideration, which is supported by classification
tasks.
   For initial, high-level analysis across the entire set of survey comments, we dem-
onstrate two approaches: 1) inductive thematic analysis, a “bottom-up” approach
supporting the use case where no predetermined labels (areas of interest) have been
defined, similar to topic modeling, and 2) multi-label classification using predefined
labels, a “top-down” approach, also referred to as deductive thematic analysis. When
categories of interest are known in advance, multi-label classification is an appropri-
ate first step, binning survey responses into relevant categories that provide a sense
of the type of feedback learners are providing. These categories also provide group-
ings of comments for further focused analysis (e.g., via extraction), as well as allow
for quantification based on the number of comments labeled with each category.
   For focused analysis, in which there is a specific question or goal for the analysis,
not necessarily known in advance, we demonstrate extraction as a key step, followed
by either a classification step or thematic analysis. To provide output for further
downstream analysis and quantification, multi-class classification can be used as a
step, as demonstrated here with the generalizable set of labels used in this study,
or with an adapted or fully customized version for one’s own use case. This step
is shown used after extraction, given that short excerpts are more likely to be ade-
quately classified with a single label versus multi-sentence comments. The output of


13
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education


other forms of classification (binary or multi-label) also lends itself well to quantifi-
cation of results.
   Sentiment analysis was applied as a final step for workflows where finding posi-
tive or negative excerpts was of interest, as demonstrated in the example related to
the level of difficulty of the course.
   Although the full model responses were in JSON format, only the relevant output
text is shown for brevity and clarity.

Workflow Examples

Example 1—High‑Level Analysis by Inductive Thematic Analysis (“Bottom‑Up”
Approach)

A workflow for finding and summarizing the main themes (ideas expressed by mul-
tiple students) of survey responses is shown in Fig. 1, and consists of three LLM
steps: 1) themes are first derived and summarized for batches of comments, each
of which is sized to fit within the context window of the model used; 2) comments
are classified using the derived themes; and 3) sets of themes from these batches are
coalesced to arrive at a final set of themes. Additionally, label counts are aggregated
from the themes that were combined. In qualitative research, steps 1 and 3 are called
inductive thematic analysis; this is similar to topic modeling, in that themes are
inductively derived from comments. In general, depending on the input size (context
window) for the model used (8 K tokens in this example) and the number of com-
ments being analyzed, dividing into batches and coalescing the themes from each
batch may be unnecessary.
    Results for running this process on the 625 comments from Q1 (‘Please describe
the best parts of this course’) are shown in Fig. 1. The number of comments that
the LLM identified as corresponding to each theme is shown, along with the theme
titles and descriptions.

Example 2—High‑Level Analysis by Categorizing Student Comments (“Top‑Down”
Approach)

Multi-label classification of survey responses, using the set of predetermined labels
developed for this study (Table 3) was run on the 625 comments from Q1 (‘Please
describe the best parts of this course’) and results are shown in Fig. 2. The catego-
rized comments can be used for analysis (for example, comparing the categorization
of responses to ‘Please describe the best parts of this course’ to the categorization
of responses to ‘What can we do to improve this course?’) or as a starting point for
further downstream tasks.

Example 3—Finding Suggestions for Improvement

A workflow for finding and quantifying suggestions for course improvement is shown
in Fig. 3, and consists of extraction of relevant excerpts, followed by multi-class

                                                                              13
                                                International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education




Fig. 1  Derivation of themes from student comments (results shown using GPT-4)




classification, based on the labels in Table 3, to facilitate quantification as well as rout-
ing of comments to the appropriate stakeholders. Excerpts resulting from the extraction
step were assumed to be focused enough that they could each be categorized with a
single class from among the pre-existing labels in Table 3.
   Results for several representative real comments from the larger set of survey com-
ments are shown in Fig. 3. The model’s CoT reasoning for each step is shown else-
where, but is omitted here for clarity.




13
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education




Fig. 2  Multi-label classification of student comments (results shown using GPT-4)


Example 4—What Other Content or Topics Were Students Interested in Seeing
Covered?

A common goal in analyzing student feedback is to better understand the gaps in
course content, in order to decide whether to develop additional material or even
new courses. To see if this type of information could reliably be derived from survey
responses, we focused on responses to relevant survey questions (Q3 and Q4) for
immunology courses with the workflow shown in Fig. 4. Results for several repre-
sentative real comments are shown. First, just the portions containing new content or
topic area suggestions are extracted from the survey responses. Content suggestion
themes are then derived and summarized from the excerpts; this is done in batches
if they cannot be fit within a single prompt to the LLM (i.e., if there are too many
excerpts to fit in the model’s maximum context size). Multi-class classification is
performed on the excerpts with the themes from each batch. If thematic analysis is
done in batches, sets of themes from these batches are then coalesced to arrive at
a final set of content themes. The results suggest that GPT-4 is capable of finding
content suggestions despite many being specific to the biomedical domain. This may
be due to the volume and diversity of the model’s pre-training data (although this
training mixture has not been disclosed). Immunology is used as an example, but the
workflow is not specific to the type of course.


Example 5—What Feedback Did Students Give About The Teaching
and Explanations?

Feedback about teachers and the quality of teaching and explanations in a course is
a frequent objective of academic course surveys. Here, we show a workflow where
multi-label classification has already been run as an initial step in high-level analy-
sis, and we use the results of that classification as our initial filter to focus on the
identified subset of comments related to teaching (corresponding directly to one of


                                                                                     13
                                                International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education




Fig. 3  Finding suggestions for improvement from student comments (results shown using GPT-4)



the pre-existing labels), with extraction used to further narrow the output of analy-
sis. The workflow, shown in Fig. 5, consisted of multi-label classification, using the
pre-existing labels developed (Table 3) followed by extraction of relevant excerpts
from the comments that were classified into the ‘teaching’ category (9% of total
comments). If multi-label classification hadn’t previously been run, extraction could
have been performed on the broader group of comments as the initial step. For our
dataset, which includes numerous multi-topic comments, the extraction step was
used to further filter the information to only content related to the goal. Results
for several representative real comments (de-identified in pre-processing) from the
larger set of survey comments are shown in Fig. 5, including one where the model
improperly filtered out the comment despite it containing a reference to the quality


13
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education




Fig. 4  Finding suggestions for new immunology content from student comments (results shown using
GPT-4)



of explanations. An error such as the one shown could be considered somewhat sub-
tle and highlights the need with zero-shot prompting of LLMs for clear specification
of the goal of the extraction.


Chain‑of‑Thought Reasoning

The prompts for binary classification, multi-label classification, multi-class clas-
sification, sentiment analysis, and evaluation of extraction results all used zero-
shot chain-of-thought (CoT) to enhance the quality of the results while maintain-
ing the zero-shot conditions of this study. The CoT reasoning was included in the


                                                                                     13
                                                International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education




Fig. 5  Feedback about teaching and explanations (results shown using GPT-4). The red ‘x’ indicates an
error by the model



structured output, allowing for inspection. Only the reasoning from GPT-4 was
consistently reliable, and examples are shown here.
   Example results for binary and multi-class classification tasks are shown in
Fig. 6 and Fig. 7, and reasoning for sentiment analysis is also shown in Fig. 7.
The reasoning, inspected manually over several hundred comments, is consistent
with the classification results and appears to provide logical justification that is
grounded in the contextual information (e.g., labels and descriptions) included
as part of the prompts (see Electronic Supplement). This suggests that the CoT
reasoning from GPT-4 meets a threshold of consistency and logic that allows for
potential downstream use cases such as prompt tuning and insight into reason-
ing for end-users. Potential benefits and caveats of such uses are explored in the
Discussion.
   Evaluation of the extraction task used a custom LLM evaluation (see Electronic
Supplement), developed for this study. In order to refine the evaluation to align
results with human preferences, we inspected the CoT reasoning along with the
structured eval results for the separate development set of survey responses and
made modifications to the evaluation prompts in an iterative fashion. An example
of the CoT output for GPT-4 is shown in Fig. 8. As prompts were altered based
on human review, the eval results changed in a consistent fashion, suggesting that
GPT-4 provided CoT reasoning may be useful in refining LLM evaluations.


13
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education




Fig. 6  Examples of GPT-4 CoT reasoning for binary classification and multi-class classification related
to the task of finding suggestions for improvement


Individual NLP Task Evaluations

To better assess the reliability of workflows such as those shown in the examples
and to answer Research Question 3, we evaluated the individual tasks, including
multi-label classification, binary classification, extraction, and sentiment analysis.


Multi‑Label Classification Metrics

The difficulty of multi-label classification tasks varies widely (Meidinger & Aßen-
macher, 2021), depending on the content to which the labels are being applied, the
design of the labels (for example, the clarity of their specification and the potential
for overlap), and the number of labels. To put the LLM results in context, we show
the inter-rater agreement for application of the eight-label set (Table 3) to our data-
set and also compare the LLM results to SetFit, another classification technique.


                                                                                           13
                                                  International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education




Fig. 7  Examples of GPT-4 CoT reasoning for multi-label classification, binary classification, and senti-
ment analysis related to the task of finding how students felt about the level of difficulty of the course


Inter‑rater Agreement 1,413 (57%) of 2,500 rows had all 4 human raters in agree-
ment across all selected labels and 1,572 (63%) had majority (3 of 4) agreement
on all selected labels. The average Jaccard similarity coefficient including all 2,500
rows (averaged across the six unique pairings of the four human raters for all rows)
was 81.24% (Table 4), suggesting that this was a challenging task even for expert
human annotators who developed the custom label set in close collaboration. GPT-4
agreement with human annotators is shown; the average across all pairings includ-
ing GPT-4 was 80.60%.

LLM and SetFit Evaluation In addition to evaluating the GPT models, we also per-
formed multi-label classification using SetFit (Tables 5 and 6).


13
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education




Fig. 8  Example of GPT-4 CoT reasoning for extraction evaluation


Table 4  Inter-rater Jaccard similarity coefficients, including human annotators and GPT-4 as another
rater/annotator (human pairs average = 81.24%; all pairs average = 80.60%)
                     Annotator1            Annotator2           GPT-4            Annotator3            Annotator4

Annotator1              -                  81.27                80.18            83.37                 82.35
Annotator2           81.27                      -               79.40         80.84                    78.42
GPT-4                80.18                 79.40                    -         80.74                    78.22
Annotator3           83.37                 80.84                80.74              -                   81.18
Annotator4           82.35                 78.42                78.22         81.18                      -



Table 5  Evaluation on consensus rows, with majority agreement on all tags (1,572 rows for LLMs, 1,489
rows for SetFit)
                                                    Macro average                      Micro average
             Jaccard        Average precision       Precision   Recall   F1            Precision   Recall      F1

GPT-4        92.97          93.91                   89.88       90.59    89.78         93.66       93.26       93.46
GPT-3.5      72.61          74.79                   69.34       82.18    72.63         72.36       84.48       77.96
SetFit       73.86          78.01                   84.37       57.59    66.85         91.92       71.43       80.39




   For the consensus rows evaluation, the zero-shot results for GPT-4 are similar to
what might be expected of fine-tuned classifiers (Meidinger & Aßenmacher, 2021).
The other models have strengths and weaknesses, with SetFit having relatively high
precision and lower recall, and GPT-3.5 following the converse pattern. The overall
results for SetFit and GPT-3.5, focusing on Jaccard coefficient and F1 scores, are
similar. The results emphasize 1) the fact that fine-tuning is desirable when feasible,


                                                                                                       13
                                                   International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education


Table 6  Evaluation on all rows using consensus labels (2500 rows for LLMs, 2359 rows for SetFit)
                                           Macro average                        Micro average
            Jaccard    Average precision   Precision       Recall     F1        Precision     Recall     F1

GPT-4       80.17      81.53               73.91           88.38      79.69     78.32         89.70      83.63
GPT-3.5     63.00      65.18               60.42           79.79      65.75     60.31         83.45      70.02
SetFit      62.72      67.52               73.22           53.08      59.61     79.40         65.14      71.57




approaching the performance of powerful LLMs like GPT-3.5 even with a few-shot
fine-tuning approach; and 2) the quality of the zero-shot performance of GPT-4.


Binary Classification Metrics

1,250 comments (randomly taken from the original selected 2,500 comments, evenly
distributed across Q1 through Q4) were classified based on the question “does this
comment contain suggestions for improvement?”, with the model assigning a ‘yes’ or
‘no’ to each comment, and results were compared against one expert human annota-
tor—as the gold standard—assigning ‘yes’ or ‘no’ to each comment. Binary classifica-
tion could be considered the simplest of the evaluated NLP tasks, and both LLM mod-
els exhibited good performance (Table 7).

Extraction Evaluation

Using ‘suggestions for improvement’ as an example target of extraction, comments
were first classified via GPT-4 as containing the target or not (see binary classification
task above). Of the 1,250 comments, 716 were labeled by binary classification as con-
taining suggestions for improvement. These comments were then run through extrac-
tion to find the individual excerpts. The quality of the extraction was then scored by
the following method, employing the concept of LLM-as-a-judge (Huang et al., 2024)
where custom LLM-based evaluations are used for cases where standardized evalua-
tion methods don’t exist or are inadequate. For each comment’s excerpt(s), GPT-4 was
used to apply a custom evaluation rubric with nine questions. Only GPT-4 was capable
of applying the evaluation reliably and was therefore used. An example of one of the
rubric questions was “Did the program extract any irrelevant excerpts? (yes or no)”
(see the extraction evaluation prompt in the Electronic Supplement for all questions in
the rubric). That question is abbreviated as the “Irrelevant Excerpts” category in the
table below, showing the percentage of “yes” answers. Given that each of the rubric


Table 7  Binary classification     Model             Accuracy          Precision          Recall         F1
task performance
                                   GPT-4             95.20             96.20              95.39          95.79
                                   GPT-3.5           90.16             89.01              93.35          91.14



13
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education


Table 8  Error rate (%) of              Metric                              GPT-4               GPT-3.5
extraction for ‘suggestions for
improvement’ from comments              Missed Excerpts                     2.37                7.82
classified as containing
‘suggestions for improvement’           Ambiguous Excerpts                  4.61                4.75
(all metrics from rubric                Missed Existing Context             0.28                0.84
and human annotation for                Irrelevant Excerpts                 0.14                0.84
hallucinations)
                                        Irrelevant Context                  0.00                0.14
                                        Implied Goal Focus                  3.07                2.79
                                        Non-Quotes                          0.00                6.01
                                        Non-Contiguous Excerpts             0.00                0.14
                                        Redundant Excerpts                  0.28                2.79
                                        Hallucinations                      0.00                3.91




Table 9  Classification of comments as negative, positive, or neutral relative to human annotator
Model                        Accuracy            Precision (macro)     Recall (macro)          F1 (macro)

GPT-4                        80.86               82.65                 80.28                   80.78
GPT-3.5                      65.17               73.68                 66.44                   64.88
twitter-roberta-base-        66.69               71.38                 64.86                   61.10
  sentiment-latest



questions had a yes/no answer, with a “yes” answer indicating a failure of the aspect
of the model’s extraction based on that question, the error rate or percentage of fail-
ures for each aspect could be determined. The extracted excerpts were also examined
by a human annotator to determine the percentage of the 716 rows that contained hal-
lucinations in the excerpts, as defined by substantial edits or complete fabrication of
additional language not present in the original comment. That percentage is shown in
the last row of Table 8, with the other rows’ results representing the scores (error rates)
determined by GPT-4 judging the extraction results from GPT-4 and GPT-3.5.
   The GPT-4 model included some ambiguous excerpts; however, those were most
commonly due to lack of context in the comment itself, rather than the model failing
to extract that context. GPT-4 followed directions very closely, and its results did not
contain hallucinations. In contrast, the output of GPT-3.5 contained hallucinations at
a rate of about 4% and edits to comments at a rate of about 6%. GPT-3.5 also missed
relevant excerpts significantly more frequently than GPT-4. Additional prompt tun-
ing may reduce the rate of these errors; nonetheless, the results suggest that a degree
of caution should be applied in using GPT-3.5 for extraction.

Sentiment Analysis Metrics

Using GPT-4 and GPT-3.5, comments related to course suggestions and improve-
ment (Q3 and Q4) were classified as ‘negative’, ‘slightly negative’, ‘neutral’,
‘slightly positive’, or ‘positive’. Table 9 shows accuracy, and macro precision, recall,
and F1 scores for three models; comparison was made by grouping ‘negative’ and

                                                                                             13
                                            International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education


‘slightly negative’ into a single negative class, keeping ‘neutral’ as its own class, and
grouping ‘positive’ and ‘slightly positive’ into a single positive class.
   GPT-4 is substantially better on each metric than the other models; however, the
results are lower than what has been seen for fine-tuned models on in-domain data-
sets, indicating that the sentiment expressed in student course feedback may differ
from the range of sentiment expressed in the internet training data of these models.
The negative class was the most challenging for all models, suggesting that negative
course feedback may differ significantly from negative internet feedback.

LLM Cost and Time

The cost of using the OpenAI APIs for GPT-4 and GPT-3.5 depends on the num-
ber of prompt tokens and number of completion tokens. For the final prompts and
tasks used in this study, the average price of running 100 comments is shown in
Table 10 for each model for different tasks (cost as of June 2023, when the results
were run). The tasks include the CoT reasoning in the completion (output), signifi-
cantly increasing the number of completion tokens. These provide an approximate
gauge given that comments vary in length. Total API cost for this study including
prompt tuning was approximately $300.
    The time for model calls for GPT-4, the slower of the OpenAI models, was
approximately 10 s for running 100 comments in parallel for most tasks listed. For
the extraction evaluation, it took approximately 1 min to run 100 comments in paral-
lel. For batches, sleep intervals were also incorporated to stay conservatively within
maximum token rates. A small percentage of API calls received errors and auto-
matic retries were used after wait intervals.


Discussion

Analysis of education feedback, in the form of unstructured data from survey
responses, is a staple for improvement of courses (Diaz et al., 2022; Flodén, 2017;
Marsh & Roche, 1993; Moss & Hendry, 2002; Schulz et al., 2014). However, this
task can be time-consuming, costly, and imprecise, hampering the ability for educa-
tors and other stakeholders to make decisions based on insights from the data (Shaik


Table 10  Cost per 100        Task                                      GPT-4                GPT-3.5
comments for GPT-4 and
GPT-3.5                       Binary classification                     $0.93                $0.04
                              Multi-label classification                $2.63                $0.12
                              Multi-class classification                $2.13                $0.10
                              Text extraction                           $1.10                $0.05
                              Text extraction evaluation                $3.01                $0.13
                              Sentiment analysis                        $1.17                $0.05
                              Inductive thematic analysis               $0.13                $0.006



13
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education


et al., 2023; Mattimoe et al., 2021; Nanda et al., 2021; Shah & Pabel, 2019). Large
language models with generative AI capabilities have become widely accessible
recently but remain underexplored in analysis of qualitative data from educational
feedback surveys.
    Our research questions focused on whether these new tools can 1) be successfully
used perform a wide variety of natural language processing tasks on survey results
(RQ1); 2) offer a degree of transparency based on capturing chain-of-thought inter-
mediate output (RQ2); and 3) perform at a level comparable to human performance
across all tasks without needing to be provided with hand-labeled examples (RQ3).
    We were able to create reliable, reproducible workflows that put together multiple
analysis tasks, running them in minutes on more than one thousand survey responses.
The results demonstrate that these workflows can provide insight into a variety of
questions that may be asked by educators, including finding suggestions for improve-
ment, identifying themes in students’ feedback, and quantifying such results through
classification, including multi-label classification. The zero-shot approach (no hand-
labeled examples, other than for evaluation metrics) provides flexibility; in other
words, tasks can rapidly be adjusted through changes in the LLM prompts, and new
tasks (for example, using extraction to find information about a different focus) can
be added without need for model fine-tuning or labeling new examples.
    We show that chain-of-thought prompting, which was used to increase accuracy, may
also provide insight into the model’s reasoning or trajectory. It is possible that the LLM
is imitating plausible reasoning rather than providing insight into how it actually arrived
at its answer; however, this distinction may be immaterial given that 1) GPT-4’s reason-
ing was logical and highly consistent with the results, displaying elements of causal rea-
soning; and 2) when prompts were changed, reasoning results changed accordingly. This
has been discussed in recent work; GPT-4 has been shown to score highly on evaluations
of causal reasoning (Kıcıman et al., 2023). In Peng et al., 2023, GPT-4 was used for eval-
uation of other LLMs and was able to provide consistent scores as well as detailed expla-
nations for those scores. While specialized non-LLM models can provide signals like
confidence scores in individual classes, they lack more detailed explanations of results;
we believe that seeing a version of logical reasoning behind complex output can foster
confidence and reduce the perception of these models as black boxes. Furthermore, it is
important to consider that having human annotators reliably provide consistent, logical
justification for each annotation is prohibitive for datasets of any appreciable scale.
    The evaluation metrics for each individual task show a human or near-human level
of performance across a range of tasks for GPT-4. GPT-3.5 does not reach this level of
accuracy. Our tasks and dataset were drawn from real-world data and actual use cases,
with some of the tasks (e.g., multi-label classification) proving challenging even for
expert annotators. The human-like level of GPT-4 can be seen in examples of the rea-
soning results as well (Figs. 6, 7, and 8). In addition, it outperformed label-efficient
fine-tuned classifiers like SetFit. For workflows that chain together two or more NLP
tasks, like those examined in this study, it is important that the performance on each
task is reliable enough such that errors do not accrue in the process of obtaining a final
result. It is likely that at the time of publication there are other models (e.g., the latest
version of Claude or the top-performing open-source models) that perform at similar or
higher levels than the version of GPT-4 used in this study.

                                                                                 13
                                          International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education


   Overall, we found that large language models are at a stage where they can be effec-
tively used across the broad range of tasks that are part of survey analysis. Use of LLMs
for this purpose has implications for education. These implications include:

1) the potential to democratize access to high quality qualitative survey analysis. The
   paradigm of “language in, language out” allows non-machine learning experts to
   create workflows that can handle a range of tasks.
2) a drastic reduction in the time and effort involved for challenging survey analysis
   tasks, shortening the feedback loop. In many cases where there is a high volume
   of survey responses, the effort and expertise necessary to arrive at data-driven
   results may otherwise be prohibitive. The goal is to be able to analyze unstruc-
   tured text survey data as easily as one might analyze quantitative results like those
   from Likert scales.
3) making educators and education leaders more ambitious in terms of the questions
   they can answer based on student feedback. For example, doing thematic analysis
   on a volume of survey responses may have been infeasible previously.

   We look forward to people using these new tools to effectively learn from student
feedback.


Limitations

The data used in this study was from a specific domain (online biomedical science
courses) and was in English. Other domains and languages were not tested.
   LLM results were highly prompt-dependent, and others may achieve even more
accurate results than those we have shown. Even within the most capable models, we
observed that prompting techniques and prompt tuning made a significant difference.
There is considerable literature on effective methods of prompting. There is an inter-
play of prompting techniques with the behavior of instruction-tuned models in a way
that may or may not fully elicit the capabilities of each model, with prompts being seen
as a form of hyperparameter to the model and with responses changing depending on
updates to model training (Chen et al., 2023).
   Other than the comparison to SetFit and to the RoBERTa sentiment analysis model,
we limited our exploration to recent OpenAI models; future work may expand this to
include other models such as the most capable proprietary models (e.g., Claude and
Gemini), and the most capable open-source models.


Concluding Remarks

While LLM analysis approaches are being used in other fields, like customer
reviews and user feedback (Morbidoni, 2023; Abdali et al., 2023), there has not
yet been rigorous demonstration of their utility and accuracy in student feedback
surveys. Our contributions are to demonstrate the viability of using LLMs for


13
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education


this purpose, and to perform a thorough analysis of the feasibility and evaluation
of the quality of LLMs’ results to show reliability in common qualitative survey
analysis tasks.
   Future research could incorporate additional prompting techniques to improve
capabilities and accuracy. For example, self-consistency (Wang et al., 2022),
reflection (iterative self-refinement, Madaan et al., 2023), and few-shot learning
have been studied and shown to be reliable means of improving performance on
difficult tasks; these were out-of-scope for the zero-shot premise of this article
but are worth exploring. In addition, the ability to compose survey analysis work-
flows is also amenable to the use of agents (Shen et al., 2023; Weng, 2023; Yao
et al., 2022). An educator or other stakeholder analyzing survey feedback should
be able to state a goal or intent to an LLM-powered agent, with the agent picking
and running tasks as a chain to get the desired analysis. Such an agent could also
incorporate non-LLM tools, for example if a fine-tuned model is available that
excels on a given task and is well-matched to the dataset at hand. Ideally, users of
such tools should be able to operate by stating intent rather than tuning prompts
or fine-tuning specialized models.
   We look forward to future progress in exploring the capabilities of these new
tools; the models will continue to improve but even in their current state, they can
be powerful tools for survey analysis.



Appendix

Additional Metrics for Multi‑Label Classification

Consensus Rows—1572 Rows Dataset (1489 for SetFit)

Precision, recall, and F1 score are shown for each tag in multi-label classification
for the consensus rows condition, along with macro averages for each metric, in
Table 11 for GPT-4. Hamming loss and subset accuracy are shown in Table 12.



Table 11  Individual label scores       Tag                            Precision   Recall   F1 Score
for multi-label classification
with GPT-4, consensus rows              Course logistics and fit       89.83       64.63    75.18
                                        Curriculum                     95.89       91.48    93.64
                                        Teaching modality              97.78       96.70    97.24
                                        Teaching                       76.04       91.25    82.95
                                        Assessment                     97.50       93.41    95.41
                                        Resources                      92.31       97.30    94.74
                                        Peer and teacher interaction   77.08       92.50    84.09
                                        Other                          92.60       97.47    94.97
                                        Macro average                  89.88       90.59    89.78



                                                                                            13
                                                  International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education


Table 12  Hamming loss and          Model                      Hamming loss                 Subset accuracy
subset accuracy for multi-label
classification, consensus rows      GPT-4                      0.0194                       0.8849
                                    GPT-3.5                    0.0710                       0.5948
                                    SetFit                     0.0508                       0.6797




Table 13  Individual label scores   Tag                                  Precision    Recall       F1 Score
for multi-label classification
with GPT-4, consensus labels        Course logistics and fit             74.81        57.71        65.16
                                    Curriculum                           82.86        86.38        84.58
                                    Teaching modality                    78.35        95.94        86.26
                                    Teaching                             56.70        87.59        68.83
                                    Assessment                           87.36        94.82        90.94
                                    Resources                            70.95        95.49        81.41
                                    Peer and teacher interaction         60.58        94.03        73.68
                                    Other                                79.64        95.10        86.68
                                    Macro average                        73.91        88.38        79.69




Table 14  Hamming loss and          Model                      Hamming loss                 Subset accuracy
subset accuracy for multi-label
classification, consensus labels    GPT-4                      0.0503                       0.7168
                                    GPT-3.5                    0.10235                      0.4628
                                    SetFit                     0.07238                      0.5774




Consensus Labels—2500 Rows Dataset (2359 for SetFit)

Precision, recall, and F1 score are shown for each tag in multi-label classification
for the consensus labels condition, along with macro averages for each metric, in
Table 13 for GPT-4. Hamming loss and subset accuracy are shown in Table 14.


Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material available at https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1007/​s40593-​024-​00414-0.

Acknowledgements We wish to thank members of the HMX team for their contributions to creating and
administering the surveys used in this study.

Author Contributions Conceptualization, methodology, software, analysis, and drafting of the manu-
script were performed by Michael J. Parker. Development of labels, annotation/labeling for multi-class
classification, and refinement of the manuscript were performed by all authors (equal contributions).

Funding This research received no external funding.




13
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education


Availability of Data and Materials The prompts and the function schemas used in this study are shared in
supplementary material (Electronic Supplements 1 and 2). To help preserve the anonymity of students
and of feedback about teachers, the survey responses are not included in an open-access repository. The
data may be provided upon request to the authors and approval of the university research ethics board.

Declarations
Ethics Approval and Consent to Participate This study was determined not to be human subjects research
by the Harvard Medical School Office of Human Research Administration.

Competing Interests The authors have no relevant financial or non-financial interests to disclose.

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License,
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as
you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Com-
mons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article
are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is
not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission
directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://​creat​iveco​mmons.​org/​licen​
ses/​by/4.​0/.



References
Abdali, S., Parikh, A., Lim, S. & Kiciman, E. (2023). Extracting self-consistent causal insights from
     users feedback with LLMs and in-context learning. In arXiv [cs.AI]. arXiv. Retrieved April 5, 2024,
     from http://​arxiv.​org/​abs/​2312.​06820
Aldeman, M., & Branoff, T. J. (2021). Impact of course modality on student course evaluations. Paper
     presented at 2021 ASEE Virtual Annual Conference Content Access, Virtual Online. Retrieved
     August 21, 2023, from https://​peer.​asee.​org/​37275.​pdf
Alhija, F.N.-A., & Fresko, B. (2009). Student evaluation of instruction: What can be learned from stu-
     dents’ written comments? Studies in Educational Evaluation, 35(1), 37–44. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
     1016/j.​stued​uc.​2009.​01.​002
Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2006). Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative Research in Psychol-
     ogy, 3(2), 77–101. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1191/​14780​88706​qp063​oa
Brennan, J., & Williams, R. (2004). Collecting and using student feedback. A guide to good practice.
     Learning and Teaching Support Network. Retrieved August 21, 2023, from https://​www.​advan​ce-​
     he.​ac.​uk/​knowl​edge-​hub/​colle​cting-​and-​using-​stude​nt-​feedb​ack-​guide-​good-​pract​ice
cardiffnlp/twitter-roberta-base-sentiment-latest. (2022). Retrieved August 21, 2023, from https://​huggi​
     ngface.​co/​cardi​ffnlp/​twitt​er-​rober​ta-​base-​senti​ment-​latest.
Chen, L., Zaharia, M., & Zou, J. (2023). How is ChatGPT’s behavior changing over time? arXiv [cs.CL].
     Retrieved August 21, 2023, from https://​arxiv.​org/​abs/​2307.​09009
Cunningham-Nelson, S., Baktashmotlagh, M., & Boles, W. (2019). Visualizing student opinion through text
     analysis. IEEE Transactions on Education, 62(4), 305–311. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​TE.​2019.​29243​85
Deepa, D., Raaji, & Tamilarasi, A. (2019). Sentiment analysis using feature extraction and dictionary-
     based approaches. In 2019 Third International conference on I-SMAC (IoT in Social, Mobile, Ana-
     lytics and Cloud) (I-SMAC), 786–790. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/I-​SMAC4​7947.​2019.​90324​56
Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K., & Toutanova, K. (2018). BERT: Pre-training of deep bidirectional
     transformers for language understanding. arXiv [cs.CL]. Retrieved August 21, 2023, from http://​
     arxiv.​org/​abs/​1810.​04805
Diaz, N. P., Walker, J. P., Rocconi, L. M., Morrow, J. A., Skolits, G. J., Osborne, J. D., & Parlier, T. R.
     (2022). Faculty use of end-of-course evaluations. International Journal of Teaching and Learning in
     Higher Education, 33(3), 285–297.




                                                                                                  13
                                                        International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education


Dommeyer, C. J., Baum, P., Hanna, R. W., & Chapman, K. S. (2004). Gathering faculty teaching evalua-
     tions by in-class and online surveys: Their effects on response rates and evaluations. Assessment &
     Evaluation in Higher Education, 29(5), 611–623. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​02602​93041​00016​89171
Edalati, M., Imran, A. S., Kastrati, Z., & Daudpota, S. M. (2022). The potential of machine learn-
     ing algorithms for sentiment classification of students’ feedback on MOOC. In Intelligent Sys-
     tems and Applications (pp. 11–22). Springer International Publishing. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​
     978-3-​030-​82199-9_2
Fan, X., Luo, W., Menekse, M., Litman, D. & Wang, J. (2015). CourseMIRROR: Enhancing large class-
     room instructor-student interactions via mobile interfaces and natural language processing. Proceed-
     ings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Sys-
     tems, 1473–1478. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1145/​27026​13.​27328​53
Ferren, A. S., & Aylesworth, M. S. (2001). Using qualitative and quantitative information in academic
     decision making. New Directions for Institutional Research, 2001(112), 67–83. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
     1002/​ir.​29
Flodén, J. (2017). The impact of student feedback on teaching in higher education. Assessment & Evalua-
     tion in Higher Education, 42(7), 1054–1068. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​02602​938.​2016.​12249​97
Gilardi, F., Alizadeh, M., & Kubli, M. (2023). ChatGPT outperforms crowd-workers for text-annotation
     tasks. arXiv [cs.CL]. Retrieved August 21, 2023, from http://​arxiv.​org/​abs/​2303.​15056
Goštautaitė, D., & Sakalauskas, L. (2022). Multi-label classification and explanation methods for stu-
     dents’ learning style prediction and interpretation. NATO Advanced Science Institutes Series e:
     Applied Sciences, 12(11), 5396. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​app12​115396
Gottipati, S., Shankararaman, V., & Lin, J. R. (2018). Text analytics approach to extract course improve-
     ment suggestions from students’ feedback. Research and Practice in Technology Enhanced Learn-
     ing, 13(1), 6. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1186/​s41039-​018-​0073-0
Gottipati, S., Shankararaman, V. & Gan, S. (2017). A conceptual framework for analyzing students’ feedback.
     2017 IEEE Frontiers in Education Conference (FIE), 1–8. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​FIE.​2017.​81907​03
Gu, Y., Tinn, R., Cheng, H., Lucas, M., Usuyama, N., Liu, X., Naumann, T., Gao, J., & Poon, H. (2021).
     Domain-specific language model pretraining for biomedical natural language processing. ACM
     Transactions on Computing for Healthcare, 3(1), 1–23. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1145/​34587​54
Hamzah, A., Hidayatullah, A. F., & Persada, A. G. (2020). Discovering trends of mobile learning research
     using topic modelling approach. International Journal of Interactive Mobile Technologies (iJIM),
     14(09), 4. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3991/​ijim.​v14i09.​11069
Hassija, V., Chamola, V., Mahapatra, A., Singal, A., Goel, D., Huang, K., Scardapane, S., Spinelli, I.,
     Mahmud, M., & Hussain, A. (2024). Interpreting black-box models: A review on explainable artifi-
     cial intelligence. Cognitive Computation, 16(1), 45–74. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s12559-​023-​10179-8
Huang, F., Kwak, H., & An, J. (2023). Is ChatGPT better than human annotators? Potential and limita-
     tions of ChatGPT in explaining implicit hate speech. arXiv [cs.CL]. Retrieved August 21, 2023,
     from http://​arxiv.​org/​abs/​2302.​07736
Huang, H., Qu, Y., Liu, J., Yang, M., Zhao, T. (2024). An empirical study of LLM-as-a-judge for LLM
     evaluation: Fine-tuned judge models are task-specific classifiers. arXiv [cs.CL]. Retrieved April 12,
     2024, from http://​arxiv.​org/​abs/​2403.​02839
Hugging Face – The AI community building the future. (n.d.). Retrieved August 21, 2023, from https://​
     huggi​ngface.​co/​datas​ets?​task_​categ​ories=​task_​categ​ories:​zero-​shot-​class​ifica​tion&​sort=​trend​ing.
Jansen, B. J., Jung, S.-G., & Salminen, J. (2023). Employing large language models in survey research.
     Natural Language Processing Journal, 4, 100020. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​nlp.​2023.​100020
Johnson, J. M., & Khoshgoftaar, T. M. (2019). Survey on deep learning with class imbalance. Journal of
     Big Data, 6(1), 1–54. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1186/​s40537-​019-​0192-5
Johnson, R. B., & Onwuegbuzie, A. J. (2004). Mixed methods research: A research paradigm whose time
     has come. Educational Researcher, 33(7), 14–26. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3102/​00131​89X03​30070​14
Kane, T. J., McCaffrey, D., Miller, T. & Staiger, D. (2013). Have we identified effective teachers? Validat-
     ing measures of effective teaching using random assignment. Research paper. MET project. Bill &
     Melinda Gates Foundation. Retrieved April 9, 2024, from https://​eric.​ed.​gov/?​id=​ED540​959
Kastrati, Z., Imran, A. S., & Kurti, A. (2020b). Weakly supervised framework for aspect-based sentiment
     analysis on students’ reviews of MOOCs. IEEE Access, 8, 106799–106810. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​
     ACCESS.​2020.​30007​39
Kastrati, Z., Arifaj, B., Lubishtani, A., Gashi, F., & Nishliu, E. (2020a). Aspect-based opinion mining
     of students’ reviews on online courses. In Proceedings of the 2020 6th International Conference



13
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education


     on Computing and Artificial Intelligence (ICCAI ’20) (pp. 510–514). Association for Computing
     Machinery. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1145/​34045​55.​34046​33
Kennedy, R. K. L., Villanustre, F., Khoshgoftaar, T. M., & Salekshahrezaee, Z. (2024). Synthesizing
     class labels for highly imbalanced credit card fraud detection data. Journal of Big Data, 11(1), 1–22.
     https://​doi.​org/​10.​1186/​s40537-​024-​00897-7
Kıcıman, E., Ness, R., Sharma, A., & Tan, C. (2023). Causal reasoning and large language models: Open-
     ing a new frontier for causality. arXiv [cs.AI]. Retrieved August 21, 2023, from http://​arxiv.​org/​abs/​
     2305.​00050
Kojima, T., Gu, S. S., Reid, M., Matsuo, Y. & Iwasawa, Y. (2022). Large language models are zero-shot
     reasoners. In arXiv [cs.CL]. arXiv. http://​arxiv.​org/​abs/​2205.​11916.
Lattuca, L. R., & Domagal-Goldman, J. M. (2007). Using qualitative methods to assess teaching effec-
     tiveness. New Directions for Institutional Research. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​ir.​233
Lee, J., Yoon, W., Kim, S., Kim, D., Kim, S., So, C. H., & Kang, J. (2020). BioBERT: A pre-trained
     biomedical language representation model for biomedical text mining. Bioinformatics, 36(4), 1234–
     1240. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1093/​bioin​forma​tics/​btz682
Loureiro, D., Barbieri, F., Neves, L., et al. (2022). TimeLMs: Diachronic language models from Twitter.
     arXiv [cs.CL]. https://​doi.​org/​10.​48550/​arXiv.​2202.​03829
Madaan, A., Tandon, N., Gupta, P., et al. (2023). Self-refine: Iterative refinement with self-feedback.
     arXiv [cs.CL]. https://​doi.​org/​10.​48550/​arXiv.​2303.​17651
Marginson, S. & Considine, M. (2000). The enterprise university: Power, governance and reinvention in
     Australia. Cambridge University Press. Retrieved April 5, 2024, from https://​play.​google.​com/​store/​
     books/​detai​ls?​id=​SLljl​FVJVO​sC
Marks, A., Al-Ali, M., Majdalawieh, M., & Bani-Hani, A. (2017). Improving academic decision-making
     through course evaluation technology. International Journal of Emerging Technologies in Learning,
     12(11), 4. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3991/​ijet.​v12.​i11.​6987
Marsh, H. W., & Roche, L. (1993). The use of students’ evaluations and an individually structured inter-
     vention to enhance university teaching effectiveness. American Educational Research Journal,
     30(1), 217–251. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3102/​00028​31203​00012​17
Masala, M., Ruseti, S., Dascalu, M., & Dobre, C. (2021). Extracting and clustering main ideas from
     student feedback using language models. In Artificial Intelligence in Education (pp. 282–292).
     Springer International Publishing. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​978-3-​030-​78292-4_​23
Mattimoe, R., Hayden, M. T., Murphy, B. & Ballantine, J. (2021). Approaches to analysis of qualitative
     research data: A reflection on the manual and technological approaches. In Accounting, Finance &
     Governance Review. https://​doi.​org/​10.​52399/​001c.​22026
Mazzarol, T., Geoffrey, N. S., & Michael, S. Y. S. (2003). The third wave: Future trends in international
     education. International Journal of Educational Management, 17(3), 90–99. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
     1108/​09513​54031​04677​78
McGourty, J., Scoles, K., & Thorpe, S. (2002). Web-based student evaluation of instruction: Promises
     and pitfalls. In 42nd Annual Forum of the Association for Institutional Research, Toronto, Ontario.
     Retrieved April 5, 2024, from http://​web.​augsb​urg.​edu/​~kraje​wsk/​educa​use20​04/​webev​al.​pdf
McKeachie, W. J. (1997). Student ratings: The validity of use. The American Psychologist, 52(11), 1218–
     1225. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1037/​0003-​066X.​52.​11.​1218
Medina, M. S., Smith, W. T., Kolluru, S., et al. (2019). A review of strategies for designing, administer-
     ing, and using student ratings of instruction. American Journal of Pharmaceutical Education, 83,
     7177. https://​doi.​org/​10.​5688/​ajpe7​177
Meidinger, M., & Aßenmacher, M. (2021). A new benchmark for NLP in social sciences: Evaluating
     the usefulness of pre-trained language models for classifying open-ended survey responses. In Pro-
     ceedings of the 13th International Conference on Agents and Artificial Intelligence (pp. 866–873).
     SCITEPRESS - Science and Technology Publications. https://​doi.​org/​10.​5220/​00102​55108​660873
Mentkowski, M. (1991). Creating a context where institutional assessment yields educational improve-
     ment. The Journal of General Education, 40, 255–283. Retrieved April 5, 2024, from http://​www.​
     jstor.​org/​stable/​27797​140
Morbidoni, C. (2023). Poster: LLMs for online customer reviews analysis: oracles or tools? Experiments
     with GPT 3.5. Proceedings of the 15th Biannual Conference of the Italian SIGCHI Chapter, 1–4.
     https://​doi.​org/​10.​1145/​36053​90.​36108​10
Moss, J., & Hendry, G. (2002). Use of electronic surveys in course evaluation. British Journal of Educa-
     tional Technology: Journal of the Council for Educational Technology, 33(5), 583–592. https://​doi.​
     org/​10.​1111/​1467-​8535.​00293


                                                                                                 13
                                                       International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education


Nanda, G., Douglas, K. A., Waller, D. R., Merzdorf, H. E., & Goldwasser, D. (2021). Analyzing large collec-
      tions of open-ended feedback from MOOC learners using LDA topic modeling and qualitative analysis.
      IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies, 14(2), 146–160. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​TLT.​2021.​30647​98
Nitin, G. I., Swapna, G., & Shankararaman, V. (2015). Analyzing educational comments for topics and
      sentiments: A text analytics approach. IEEE Frontiers in Education Conference (FIE), 2015, 1–9.
      https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​FIE.​2015.​73442​96
Onan, A. (2021a). Sentiment analysis on massive open online course evaluations: A text mining and deep
      learning approach. Computer Applications in Engineering Education, 29(3), 572–589. https://​doi.​org/​
      10.​1002/​cae.​22253
Onan, A. (2021b). Sentiment analysis on product reviews based on weighted word embeddings and deep
      neural networks. Concurrency and Computation: Practice & Experience, 33(23). https://​doi.​org/​10.​
      1002/​cpe.​5909
Orescanin, M., Smith, L. N., Sahu, S., Goyal, P., & Chhetri, S. R. (2023). Editorial: Deep learning with lim-
      ited labeled data for vision, audio, and text. Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence, 6, 1213419. https://​doi.​
      org/​10.​3389/​frai.​2023.​12134​19
Pangakis, N., Wolken, S., & Fasching, N. (2023). Automated annotation with generative AI requires valida-
      tion. arXiv [cs.CL]. Retrieved April 5, 2024, from http://​arxiv.​org/​abs/​2306.​00176
Papers with Code - Machine Learning Datasets. (n.d.). Retrieved August 21, 2023, from https://​paper​swith​
      code.​com/​datas​ets?​task=​text-​class​ifica​tion.
Patil, P. P., Phansalkar, S. & Kryssanov, V. V. (2019). Topic modelling for aspect-level sentiment analysis.
      Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Data Engineering and Communication Technol-
      ogy, 221–229. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​978-​981-​13-​1610-4_​23
Peng, B., Li, C., He, P., et al. (2023). Instruction tuning with GPT-4. arXiv [cs.CL]. https://​doi.​org/​10.​48550/​
      arXiv.​2304.​03277
Perez-Encinas, A., & Rodriguez-Pomeda, J. (2018). International students’ perceptions of their needs when
      going abroad: Services on demand. Journal of Studies in International Education, 22(1), 20–36. https://​
      doi.​org/​10.​1177/​10283​15317​724556
Pradhan, V. K., Schaekermann, M., & Lease, M. (2022). In search of ambiguity: A three-stage workflow
      design to clarify annotation guidelines for crowd workers. Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence, 5, 828187.
      https://​doi.​org/​10.​3389/​frai.​2022.​828187
Pyasi, S., Gottipati, S. & Shankararaman, V. (2018). SUFAT: An analytics tool for gaining insights from
      student feedback comments. (2018). 2018 Frontiers in Education Conference 48th FIE: San Jose, CA,
      October 3–6: Proceedings, 1–9. Retrieved April 5, 2024, from https://​core.​ac.​uk/​downl​oad/​pdf/​20025​
      4353.​pdf
Reimers, N., & Gurevych, I. (2019). Sentence-BERT: Sentence embeddings using Siamese BERT-networks.
      arXiv [cs.CL]. https://​doi.​org/​10.​48550/​arxiv.​1908.​10084
Reiss, M. V. (2023). Testing the reliability of ChatGPT for text annotation and classification: A cautionary
      remark. arXiv [cs.CL]. Retrieved August 21, 2023, from http://​arxiv.​org/​abs/​2304.​11085
Reynolds, L., & McDonell, K. (2021). Prompt programming for large language models: Beyond the few-shot
      paradigm. arXiv [cs.CL]. https://​doi.​org/​10.​48550/​arXiv.​2102.​07350
Richardson, J. T. E. (2005). Instruments for obtaining student feedback: A review of the literature. Assess-
      ment & Evaluation in Higher Education, 30(4), 387–415. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​02602​93050​00991​93
Riger, S. & Sigurvinsdottir, R. (2016). Thematic Analysis. In Jason, L., & Glenwick, D. (Eds.), Handbook of
      methodological approaches to community-based research: Qualitative, quantitative, and mixed meth-
      ods (pp. 33–41). Oxford university press.
Rother, A., Niemann, U., Hielscher, T., Völzke, H., Ittermann, T., & Spiliopoulou, M. (2021). Assessing the
      difficulty of annotating medical data in crowdworking with help of experiments. PLoS ONE, 16(7),
      e0254764. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1371/​journ​al.​pone.​02547​64
Schreiner, M. (2023). GPT-4 architecture, datasets, costs and more leaked. Retrieved April 5, 2024, from
      https://​the-​decod​er.​com/​gpt-4-​archi​tectu​re-​datas​ets-​costs-​and-​more-​leaked/
Schulz, J., Sud, G. & Crowe, B. (2014). Lessons from the field: The role of student surveys in teacher evalu-
      ation and development. Bellwether Education Partners. Retrieved April 5, 2024, from https://​eric.​ed.​
      gov/?​id=​ED553​986
Shah, M. & Ali, H. (2023). Imbalanced data in machine learning: A comprehensive review. https://​doi.​org/​
      10.​13140/​RG.2.​2.​18456.​98564
Shah, M., & Pabel, A. (2019). Making the student voice count: Using qualitative student feedback to enhance
      the student experience. Journal of Applied Research in Higher Education, 12(2), 194–209. https://​doi.​
      org/​10.​1108/​JARHE-​02-​2019-​0030


13
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education


Shaik, T., Tao, X., Li, Y., Dann, C., McDonald, J., Redmond, P., & Galligan, L. (2022). A review of the
     trends and challenges in adopting natural language processing methods for education feedback analysis.
     IEEE Access, 10, 56720–56739. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​ACCESS.​2022.​31777​52
Shaik, T., Tao, X., Dann, C., Xie, H., Li, Y. & Galligan, L. (2023). Sentiment analysis and opinion mining on
     educational data: A survey. In arXiv [cs.CL]. arXiv. Retrieved April 4, 2024, from http://​arxiv.​org/​abs/​
     2302.​04359
Shen, Y., Song, K., Tan, X., et al. (2023). HuggingGPT: Solving AI tasks with ChatGPT and its friends in
     Hugging Face. arXiv [cs.CL]. https://​doi.​org/​10.​48550/​arXiv.​2303.​17580
Sindhu, I., Muhammad, S., Badar, K., Bakhtyar, M., Baber, J., & Nurunnabi, M. (2019). Aspect-based opin-
     ion mining on student’s feedback for faculty teaching performance evaluation. IEEE Access, 7, 108729–
     108741. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​ACCESS.​2019.​29288​72
Smith, A. E., & Humphreys, M. S. (2006). Evaluation of unsupervised semantic mapping of natural language
     with Leximancer concept mapping. Behavior Research Methods, 38(2), 262–279. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
     3758/​bf031​92778
Spooren, P., Brockx, B., & Mortelmans, D. (2013). On the validity of student evaluation of teaching: The
     state of the art. Review of Educational Research, 83(4), 598–642. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3102/​00346​54313​
     496870
Stowell, J. R., Addison, W. E., & Smith, J. L. (2012). Comparison of online and classroom-based student
     evaluations of instruction. Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education, 37(4), 465–473. https://​doi.​
     org/​10.​1080/​02602​938.​2010.​545869
Sunar, A. S., & Khalid, M. S. (2024). Natural language processing of student’s feedback to instructors: A
     systematic review. IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies, 17, 741–753. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​
     TLT.​2023.​33305​31
Sutoyo, E., Almaarif, A., & Yanto, I. T. R. (2021). Sentiment analysis of student evaluations of teaching
     using deep learning approach. In International Conference on Emerging Applications and Technologies
     for Industry 4.0 (EATI’2020) (pp. 272–281). Springer International Publishing. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​
     978-3-​030-​80216-5_​20
Törnberg, P. (2023). ChatGPT-4 outperforms experts and crowd workers in annotating political twitter mes-
     sages with zero-shot learning. In arXiv [cs.CL]. arXiv. Retrieved August 21, 2023, from http://​arxiv.​
     org/​abs/​2304.​06588
Tunstall, L., Reimers, N., Jo, U. E. S., Bates, L., Korat, D., Wasserblat, M., & Pereg, O. (2022). Efficient
     few-shot learning without prompts. In arXiv [cs.CL]. arXiv. https://​doi.​org/​10.​48550/​arXiv.​2209.​11055
UC Berkeley Center for Teaching & Learning. (n.d.). Course evaluations question bank. Retrieved August
     21, 2023, from https://​teach​ing.​berke​ley.​edu/​course-​evalu​ations-​quest​ion-​bank
Unankard, S., & Nadee, W. (2020). Topic detection for online course feedback using LDA. In Emerging
     Technologies for Education (pp. 133–142). Springer International Publishing. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​
     978-3-​030-​38778-5_​16
University of Wisconsin—Madison. (n.d.). Best practices and sample questions for course evaluation sur-
     veys. In Student learning assessment. Retrieved August 21, 2023, from https://​asses​sment.​wisc.​edu/​
     best-​pract​ices-​and-​sample-​quest​ions-​for-​course-​evalu​ation-​surve​ys/
Veselovsky, V., Ribeiro, M. H., & West, R. (2023). Artificial artificial artificial intelligence: Crowd workers
     widely use large language models for text production tasks. arXiv [cs.CL]. https://​doi.​org/​10.​48550/​
     arXiv.​2306.​07899
Wallace, S. L., Lewis, A. K., & Allen, M. D. (2019). The state of the literature on student evaluations of
     teaching and an exploratory analysis of written comments: Who benefits most? College Teaching,
     67(1), 1–14. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​87567​555.​2018.​14833​17
Wang, X., Wei, J., Schuurmans, D., et al. (2022). Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in
     language models. arXiv [cs.CL]. https://​doi.​org/​10.​48550/​arXiv.​2203.​11171
Wei, J., Wang, X., Schuurmans, D., et al. (2022). Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large lan-
     guage models. arXiv [cs.CL], 24824–24837. https://​doi.​org/​10.​48550/​arXiv.​2201.​11903
Weng, L. (2023). LLM-powered autonomous agents. Lil’Log. Retrieved August 21, 2023, from https://​lilia​
     nweng.​github.​io/​posts/​2023-​06-​23-​agent/
White, J., Fu, Q., Hays, S., et al. (2023). A prompt pattern catalog to enhance prompt engineering with Chat-
     GPT. arXiv [cs.SE]. https://​doi.​org/​10.​48550/​arXiv.​2302.​11382
Wongsurawat, W. (2011). What’s a comment worth? How to better understand student evaluations of teach-
     ing. Quality Assurance in Education, 19(1), 67–83. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1108/​09684​88111​11077​62
Yao, S., Zhao, J., Yu, D., et al. (2022). ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. arXiv
     [cs.CL]. https://​doi.​org/​10.​48550/​arXiv.​2210.​03629


                                                                                                   13
                                                   International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education


Zhang, H., Dong, J., Min, L., & Bi, P. (2020). A BERT fine-tuning model for targeted sentiment analysis
    of Chinese online course reviews. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence Tools: Architectures,
    Languages, Algorithms, 29(07n08), 2040018. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1142/​S0218​21302​04001​87

Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional affiliations.




Authors and Affiliations

Michael J. Parker1         · Caitlin Anderson1 · Claire Stone2 · YeaRim Oh2

* Michael J. Parker
  michael_parker@hms.harvard.edu
    Caitlin Anderson
    caitlin_anderson@hms.harvard.edu
    Claire Stone
    claire_stone@hms.harvard.edu
    YeaRim Oh
    yearim_oh@hms.harvard.edu
1
    Office of Online Learning, Harvard Medical School, HMX, 4 Blackfan Circle, Boston, MA,
    USA
2
    Office of External Education, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA




13
