Improved prompting and process for writing user personas with
LLMs, using qualitative interviews: Capturing behaviour and
personality traits of users.

Stefano De Paoli – s.depaoli@abertay.ac.uk
Abertay University


Abstract
This draft paper presents a workflow for creating User Personas with Large Language Models,
using the results of a Thematic Analysis of qualitative interviews. The proposed workflow uses
improved prompting and a larger pool of Themes, compared to previous work conducted by the
author for the same task. This is possible due to the capabilities of a recently released LLM which
allows the processing of 16 thousand tokens (GPT3.5-Turbo-16k) and also due to the possibility
to offer a refined prompting for Personas’ creation. The paper offers details of performing Phase
2 and 3 of Thematic Analysis, and then discusses the improved workflow for creating Personas.
The paper also offers some reflections on the relationship between the proposed process and
existing approaches to Personas such as the “data-driven” and “qualitative” Personas. Moreover,
the paper offers reflections on the capacity of LLMs to capture user behaviours and personality
traits, from the underlying dataset of qualitative interviews used for the analysis.




Introduction
The goal of this draft paper is to build on work previously conducted by the author on performing
a Thematic Analysis (TA) of qualitative data with a Large Language Model (LLM) (see De Paoli,
2023a and 2023b), following the 6 phases to TA proposed by Braun and Clarke (2006). In the
previous work I showed it is possible to perform phases 2-5 of a TA (initial coding, generation of
themes, themes validation and summarisation) using an LLM, with some degree of validity (De
Paoli, 2023a). Moreover, I also showed that it is possible to perform phase 6 of a TA, which relates
to the writing up of the results (De Paoli, 2023b). In relation to phase 6 specifically, in my previous
work I proposed a workflow to write user personas with an LLM, based on the results of a TA of
qualitative interviews also conducted with the support of the LLM. The previous work presented,
however, a number of limitations, and it was in essence an initial attempt to perform phase 6 of a
TA, whilst consolidating the phases 2-5. However, I believe there is scope to explore more the
workflow for writing User Personas and attempt at producing far more articulated and composite
Personas’ narratives in phase 6. This is the goal of this manuscript.
The impetus for this work comes from recent developments in the areas of User Experience (UX)
and LLMs. An online post which has captured the attention of the User Experience (UX)
community, entitled “Can ChatGPT Replace UX Researchers? An Empirical Analysis of
Comment Classifications”, reported the results of performing a TA of a relatively small set of
online user comments comparing the Themes produced by the LLM and by Human Analysts,
showing overall a good agreement between the codes using the Cohen K measure (Schiavone et
al., 2023). In part this confirms also my previous observations that, to an extent, it is possible to
perform some form of TA with an LLM which show also some degree of inter-reliability between
humans and LLMs. Most interestingly, the post was picked up by Jakob Nielsen, one of founding
researchers in the field of usability, which commented that “this doesn’t mean that ChatGPT can
analyze user *behavior*, only that it is likely a time-saver in grouping non-behavioral
questionnaire responses. (ChatGPT is known to be great at summarizing and classifying text
without understanding what it means.)” 1 It is possible that Nielsen, when using the work
‘behavior’ was referring specifically to usability. Nonetheless it is an interesting problem to
explore whether an LLM such as GPT3,5-Turbo could indeed capture some aspects of user’s
behaviours (or not) as part of the performing of a TA, and if we can reflect such behaviours in
Personas, a key UX tool. It may actually be possible to test if a TA of user interviews done by an
LLM can pick up aspects related with the user behaviour or the user personality traits, in order to
build a user Persona. In my previous work, for building Personas I concentrated on needs and
challenges only (i.e. what Nielsen probably call non-behavioural responses), largely for
demonstrative purposes (i.e. demonstrating we could build some sort of textual output with LLMs,
using the results of a data analysis). These two dimensions clearly did not encompass any specific
behavioural trait or the personality aspects of a Persona.
The second factor giving impetus to this work is the recent release (July 2023) of a version of the
LLM GPT3.5-turbo, which can accommodate a much large number of tokens (16 thousand)
compared to the version I used in my previous work (which did accommodate 4097 tokens only).
While the underlying logic of the larger LLM is exactly the same as the smaller one, the first then
allows much larger prompts and responses, thus possibly allowing to work with more material as
input and to produce much richer and extended textual narratives as output.
In the following pages I will first present some basic elements of the state-of-the-art on using
LLMs for qualitative analysis or of coding of textual material, and of user personas and LLMs. I
will then briefly present some key methodological aspects of this work, before turning to reflect
on an improved process of building personas from a TA, done with an LLM. The data for this
research is a set of user interviews with European farmers conducted by the H2020 project
EUREKA (Vago and Spanoghe, 2023). The interview transcripts are available as open data from
zenodo. The paper concludes with a discussion reflecting on the use of LLMs for building Personas
and the relation to the broader field of UX research.


1 https://www.linkedin.com/posts/jakobnielsenphd_can-chatgpt-replace-ux-researchers-an-empirical-activity-

7067298800259760128-ZmsS/
Literature review
In this section we will briefly discuss key aspects on the state of the art around doing qualitative
analysis with the support of an LLM, and literature and other sources related to the use of LLMs
in User Research and then focus on some key literature elements of User Personas.
To the author's knowledge there are 2 significant papers which have focused on using LLMs for
qualitative analysis, at least at the level of initial coding and some other less developed or
tangential contributions. In qualitative analysis coding normally comes early in the process (e.g. it
is the second step of TA) and in essence it encompasses assigning a descriptive label to certain
portion of data to capture specific aspects of the data, such as e.g. meaning, events. There are
several strategies for coding and a very comprehensive overview is offered by Saldaña (2021). In
relation to LLMs more specifically, Xhiao et al. (2023) and Gao et al. (2023) approached
qualitative coding with the use of an LLM, showing good level of agreement between human codes
and the LLMs, using Cohen’s Kappa metric for inter-reliability. Gao et al. (2023) focused on
collaboration in coding and proposed a tool called CollabCoder for conducting qualitative coding.
Xhiao et al. (2023) offered interesting insights about the role of the prompt in the analysis, in
relation to deductive coding with a pre-defined codebook. As described elsewhere my approach
differs from theirs as I am working on having the LLM doing inductive TA, rather than working
on deductive coding. Moreover, I sought to cover – at least for TA – the whole process of analysis,
whereas Gao et al., 2023 and Xhiao et al., 2023 only focus on the coding phase of qualitative
analysis. The inductive process of coding and the reuse of open data I am doing does not also
immediately allow the use of inter-reliability metrics. Moreover, as I am using analysis performed
by other scholars to validate my approach, it is not possible to guarantee that the coders (whether
humans or LLMs), have seen the same portions of data in likely the same order. Therefore, in the
first case (i.e. the works of Xhiao et al. and Gao et al.) the K metrics can be applied as the coding
framework is decided in advance and there is a guarantee that the material is seen in the exact same
form. In my case, no coding framework is decided in advance and as I work using chunks of data
it is not possible to know if the LLM has seen the same data are the original coders , and the K
metric cannot be used. However, I have shown with a comparative evaluation that an LLMs can
generate most of the codes that human analysts produce, thus showing that an inductive TA done
with an LLM, albeit still crude, has some degree of validity (De Paoli, 2023a). Moreover, I also
conducted phase 6 of a TA, using the results of a TA to write intermediate research products like
indeed user personas (De Paoli, 2023b).
Tangential work in the area of data analysis has seen experimentation with the use of LLMs for
assisting with deductive content analysis (Chew et al., 2023), or for the annotation of data (Zhang
et al. 2023), in particular audio-visual data. As anticipated, a recent online post by Schiavone et al.
(2023) entitled “Can ChatGPT Replace UX Researchers? An Empirical Analysis of Comment
Classification”, has used chatGPT to conduct a TA for the classification of user comments,
showing that human-to-human (k=0.7) and human-to-llm (k=0.63) inter-reliability of coding is
very similar. Thus, further confirming previous observations that coding and even TA can be
performed satisfactorily with LLMs, albeit in this case on a small sample of online comments.
Therefore, existing evidence preliminarily tells that performing a TA with LLMs is possible. This
online post by Schiavone et al. (2023) is interesting also because it raises some observations about
if and how LLMs will impact the UX research world. Some reflections on this were offered also
in De Paoli (2023b), and it does seem that the conclusions are similar, namely that LLMs will not
replace user researchers, but complement their work, and that UX researchers may need to acquire
new skills to operate LLMs in their work.
This naturally leads, then, to consider the role of LLMs in the writing of user Personas as one of
the possible tasks where UX researchers can rely on these new technologies. Personas are a key
tool in UX research and are used as fictional but still realistic representations of users (Harley,
2015). They are fictional because they are narratives seeking to capture certain aspects of the target
user groups. They are realistic because they are created from data collected from real users (e.g.
see Cooper, 2007). Personas support designers in taking decisions, whilst avoiding just talking
generically about “the user” and thus focusing on specific traits, behaviours, goals or frustrations
of the real users. One of the benefits of using personas is that they can be a shared understanding
tool for designers, developers, and stakeholders (Nielsen and Hansen, 2008). The most common
type of personas used in UX work are built from qualitative data, most likely semi -structured
interviews or ethnographic observations. The data analysis on e.g. interviews reveal patterns across
the sampled users which can then be used as the building block of personas’ narratives. TA is one
of the approaches commonly used to analyse interviews for building personas (Rosala, 2019).
There also is an increasingly influential approach to building personas which is defined as “data-
driven” (see e.g. Salminen et al., 2021, for a review; McGinn and Kotamraju 2008, for an early
paper; Jensen at al., 2022 for a comprehensive overview; and Salminen et al. 2020 for reflections
around ethics and bias in data driven personas), which relies on big data, analytics and algorithms.
The name “data-driven” is to an extent misleading as also the personas built from rich qualitative
data are data driven, but in essence “data driven personas” encapsulate the use of algorithms for
analysing a much larger pool of often numerical data, such as previous surveys, demographics
data, analytics, market research and so on. These personas can be written entirely by algorithms or
with algorithms assisted by humans (Jansen et al., 2020). A specific subset of these has been called
“automatic persona generation” which, beyond “data driven” personas, also see the personas
narrative as automatically generated entirely by algorithms (Salaminen et al., 2019).
To an extent “data-driven” personas, could be seen has having some similarities with the approach
I proposed in De Paoli (2023b) as the personas are built with the support of the LLMs algorithms.
However, the personas written with LLMs that I am proposing are based on qualitative data
analysis, rather than on quantitative data and related analysis. Consequently, they are closer to the
“traditional” types of personas built from rich qualitative material. Moreover, the personas
produced with LLMs have to be seen as the product of a Human-AI collaboration, as they are not
entirely written by algorithms. Perhaps, one could see then the proposition to build personas with
an LLM as a middle ground approach in-between the entirely qualitative personas, hand crafted
by researchers, and the “data-driven/automatic” personas, produced with substantial work
delegated to algorithms and relying on big data.
Lastly, the recent hype around LLMs has also seen attempts to build Personas with model
applications such as e.g. chatGPT, with no underlying empirical data, and effectively reusing the
training material of LLMs. However, in essence, the existing attempts are using LLMs to build
entirely fictional Personas, not based on any actual data. These attempts can be found in several
online posts and have for example been dubbed as synthetic personas 2. The issues with creating
entirely fictional Personas rest with the fact that they are not indeed based on using actual user
data to derive insights that can help with e.g. system design. In my previous work I adopted a
definition from Harley (2015) which states that Personas are “fictional, yet realistic” user
representations. This, I believe is an important metric for building Personas as it can be used as
the testing element of LLMs generated Personas. Indeed, those personas created with LLMs,
without any underlying user data are fictional, but not realistic as they are not based on actual user
data. On the other hand, LLMs generated Personas which are based on existing data and an analysis
do also have the property of being realistic. Table 1 provides a brief overview of the types of
Personas discussed above, in relation to both the kind of data upon which they are built and in
relation to who writes the narratives. The focus of my work is on LLMs qualitative personas.


 Personas       Qualitative             Data Driven             LLMs Qualitative    LLMs Fictional
 Type           Personas                Personas                Personas            Personas
 Type of        Qualitative (e.g.       Largely                 Qualitative (e.g.   No empirical data
 Data           interviews)             quantitative (e.g.      interviews)
                                        survey analytics)
 Written        Human                   Automation              Human-AI            AI (I.e. LLMs)
 by                                     (algorithms),           Collaboration
                                        sometimes human
                                        assisted



Table 1 – Brief summary of some examples of personas based on type of data used and who writes
them




Material and methods
For the purposes of conducting the Thematic Analysis I used the LLM GPT3.5-Turbo-16k3. This
is a model that allows processing 16 thousand tokens (which cover both the input prompt and the
output response). The model used in the previous work on Personas (see De Paoli, 2023b) allowed
to use 4097 tokens during processing. Therefore, the 16k model supports a much larger
prompting/response and would support using more material from an analysis for building

2 https://niloufars.substack.com/p/i-tried-out-syntheticusers-so-you
3 See https://platform.openai.com/docs/models
Personas, whilst at the same time allowing to produce a much more composite narrative. The
model was accessed through the OpenAI API using ad-hoc python scripts, where the prompt to
the model is part of scripts which perform additional operations on the data such as formatting,
storing, or slicing. More details on the use of the API and python for performing the analysis can
be seen from the previous papers (De Paoli, 2023a and 2023b) and will not be repeated here. I will
instead concentrate on discussing some aspects of the prompts used.
A prompt is in essence the set of instructions we request the LLM to perform, and the creation of
a prompt capable of producing the expected results is often referred to as ‘prompt engineering’.
For an overview of the concept and a catalog of prompting strategies, please see White et al.
(2023). The production and refining of prompts are fundamental for having LLMs perform their
tasks. In the case of this work, the prompting is the outcome of several testing until the desired
output is reached, that is testing with different instructions how the LLM performs the task, until
a suitable prompt is identified. As a TA has already been performed, the prompts used in this paper
have already been tested and proved to work. However, some variations were introduced, which
will be addressed below. This paper will perform a further TA on the open dataset of farmers from
the EUREKA project (Vago and Spanoghe, 2023), already used in the previous work on writing
personas with LLMs (De Paoli. 2023b). The methodological approach here repeats roughly the
same steps, however there are some differences which will also be discussed below.
First the approach I propose seeks to perform a TA with an LLM following the key phases to a TA
proposed by Braun and Clarke (2006) in their seminal work. The idea is to perform each phase in
turn to arrive at a consolidated set of themes. After this it will be possible to perform the writing-
up phase of the personas, that corresponds to phase 6 of TA. In particular, phases 2-6 can be
performed alongside the LLMs (from the initial coding, up to writing). Phase 1, the familiarisation
with the data, is done manually by the human researcher, largely to clean the data for processing
(for example by removing introductory sections of the interview transcripts where the interviewer
explains to the participant what the goal of the project is etc.) and for preparing chunks for analysis
(this work created 30 chunks from the 13 interview of the dataset, ranging from about 600 words
to 1800 words). Even if the new model accommodates 16k tokens, it is important to divide each
interview into smaller chunks, this is because it facilitates processing, and it also allows to reach
some degree of granularity in the generation of codes.
For the purpose of this paper, sets of Themes have been generated (through performing phases 2-
3 of a TA) in this research covering specifically the following sets: users’ goals, frustrations,
behaviours and personality traits. Key for the generation of these sets of Themes is however the
code generation, covered by phase 2 of a TA. I generated four sets of codes using the process and
prompt shown in Figure 1, as the basis to build the four sets.
Each chunk of interview then was processed with the prompt (inside a for loop), for the
identification of codes (see Figure 1). This, following the process detailed in De Paoli (2023a and
2023b), amounts to the beginning of phase 2 of a TA. In the prompt I offered the model a simple,
but clear definition of what was sought from the data. In Figure 1 for example, there is a definition
of what are “user personality traits” and then the request in the prompt to identify “up to 4” user
personality traits. Lastly a final component of the prompt is the request to format the response as
a json file, with the content (i.e. codes and quotes) all contained in one main key (e.g. ‘traits’),
which will support the processing of the code in the subsequent phases of the work.


        for i in range(l):
           text = df.loc[i]['Interview_chunk']
           prompt = f"""
           User personality traits refer to typical patterns of behavior, thoughts, and emotions
           of Users.

           Identify up to 4 relevant user behaviours of the interviewee in the text below, provide
           a name for each behaviour, a summary description of the behaviour and a quote
           from the respondent for each behaviour no longer than 4 lines

           Format the response as a json file keeping names, descriptions and quotes together in
           the json, and keep them together in 'traits'.

           ```{text}```
           """
Figure 1 – Prompt used for the generation of initial codes
Table two shows the definition used in each prompting to identify the four set of initial codes. I
selected and/or adapted definitions retrieved directly from ChatGPT4 (e.g. I asked ChatGPT to
give me a simple definition of user goals and then reused with minimal changes into the prompt).
Other definitions could be used, including from academic or practitioners' work. However, I
wanted to work with very simple and direct definitions, and definitions given by ChatGPT are
sufficient for this.
 Themes             Definition used in initial coding prompt
 User behaviour     User behavior are the actions, interactions, and communications made by
                    individuals while engaging with digital or physical products, or services
 Frustration        Frustrations are feelings of dissatisfaction, resulting from obstacles, unmet
                    expectations, or barriers to achieving one's goals.
 Goals              User goals are the specific objectives or intentions that individuals aim to
                    accomplish when interacting with a product or service.
 Personality traits User personality traits refer to typical patterns of behavior, thoughts, and
                    emotions of users.
Table 2 – Definitions used in the prompts for initial coding



4 https://chat.openai.com/
The use of the four definitions in the prompt (as per Figure 1), thus led to the generation of four
sets of initial codes. I asked the model to generate up to 4 codes for each chunk. The number of
codes to be generated is set by the researcher. This number should probably be a good balance
between granularity and avoidance of reaching the maximum number of tokens error of the model.
To note that in this instance the initial coding is more granular than the one proposed in previous
work on the same dataset (De Paoli, 2023), since we are working with smaller chunks of the
interviews (max 1800 tokens, compared to about 2500 in previous work), and are asking the model
to infer 4 codes, rather than 3 from each chunk. This is possible because the model used here
accommodates 16k tokens.
As the LLM sees chunks of interviews separately (with no memory of what it has done previously),
we have already observed in previous work that codes can be repeated (see De Paoli, 2023a) across
the chunks. Therefore, I also operated a codebook reduction to detect duplicates and merge them
with very similar/identical codes, whilst keeping track of the relative interview and quotes from
which the code was initially generated. Ultimately this led to the generation of four sets of unique
initial codes as detailed in the table below.
 Set of codes                               Number of codes (after reduction of codebook)
 Behaviour                                  113
 Frustrations                               104
 Goals                                      79
 Personality Traits                         65
Table 3 – Unique codes for each set
Following the establishment of the initial codes, it is then possible to approach phase 3 of a TA,
which requires sorting and organising codes into Themes. Themes are the main outcome of a
Thematic Analysis, and they effectively constitute patterns across the data. Due to the
demonstrative nature of this paper which concentrates on advanced prompting for building
Personas, I did not perform phase 4 and 5 of TA, as in essence the results from phase 3 are enough
material (Themes) for testing the creation of Personas. Anyway, a suggested methodological
approach for performing these two phases (4/5) with LLMs is described in De Paoli (2023a and
2023b), with the second paper also using the same dataset used here. Phase 4 and 5 are essential
for producing a high-quality TA.
For creating Themes from the initial codes, I used the same prompt proposed in previous work
which is shown below (Figure 2). This is a tested prompt which produces Themes by grouping
codes, without giving any indication as to what the focus of Themes should be, in a completely
inductive fashion. I instructed the model to generate 11 Themes for Behaviour, Frustrations and
Goals, and 8 for Personality Traits (due to the lower number of unique codes). As discussed in
previous work, the choice of how many Themes to generate is somewhat arbitrary and depends on
the choices of researchers. I decided on 11 (and 8) just to have sufficient variety (even though this
may create overlaps), but it is certainly possible to create a smaller number of Themes. Themes
obtained as response to the prompt from the model were also formatted as a json (using another
prompt) for processing in the write-up phase.
       prompt = f"""
       Determine how all the topics in the following list of topics can be grouped together, and
       topics can also be in more than one group. \


       Group all the topics numbers only and provide a name and a description for each group\


       Create 8 significant groups\


       Display the full list


       List of topics: {", ".join(topic_list)}


       """
Figure 2 – Prompt used for grouping and sorting codes into Themes


Once the Themes were generated, I approached the phase of writing up the Personas. I devised a
python script making a random selection of two Themes from each set (i.e. 4 tuples each with 2
elements), which were then consecutively passed into a prompt for the LLM to write up a Persona
based on the analysis. To note that each Theme passed to the model comprises: the Theme name,
its description, all the underlying codes (and their description) and all the related quotes. Moreover
a few of the Themes resulted in being quite large and I further broke them down into sub-groups
to facilitate the production of the prompt, whilst limiting therefore the risk of reaching the
maximum number of tokens (even though some Themes combinations would still lead to the
error). The workflow, with the random generation of tuples is described in Figure 4. The new
prompt used for generating the Personas is presented in Figure 3 and requires some additional
explanations. The 4 sets (i.e. lists of codes composing a Theme) of tuples are passed in the prompt,
clearly instructing the LLM about the content of each list (e.g. Frustrations, Goals), which are at
the bottom of the prompt itself. These four sets are the material from which the LLM will build
the Personas.
The prompt instructs the LLM to tell what the Persona basic demographics are including the name,
age and country. Following, the prompt instructs the LLM to identify what the Persona main goal
(taken from the list) is, and what is the Persona main frustration. Next the prompt asks the model
to include a quote illustrating the Persona goal (also taken from the data shown to the model) and
a narrative background (for bout 250 words). Further, the prompt instructs the model to include in
the narrative two additional sub-goals and sub-frustrations, as bullet points. Lastly the prompt
instructs the model to provide as bullet points lists of 3 behaviours and personality traits.


       prompt = f"""
       Using the lists provided below, write a user persona
       The persona should be structured as follows:


       Name and surname (realistic also based on the country)
       Country: name of the country of the Persona (which must be European)
       Age: Based on the lists tell if the persona is young, middle or old age
       "Goal & Frustration": tell what the persona main goal (max 1) is and what is the
       persona main frustration, include a quote taken from the quotes in the goal list
       representing the main goal
       "Narrative": include also a narrative background of the persona (max 250 words)


       "Additional goals": identify with bullet points 2 additional goals (max 20 words each)
       and two additional frustrations (max 20 words each) of the persona.


       "Behaviour": identify the personas key behaviours (max 3, 20 words each),


       "Personality": identify the main persona personality traits (max 3, 20 words each).


       List of frustrations: {", ".join(frustrations_list)}
       List of goals: {", ".join(goals_list)}
       List of behaviours: {", ".join(behaviours_list)}
       List of personality traits: {", ".join(traits_list)}
       """


Figure 3 – Prompt used for the generation of Personas using the Themes
Figure 4 – Workflow used for the generation of Personas, using the Themes


To note that occasionally the model would still produce a max tokens number error (i.e. the number
of tokens processed, including prompt and response, was more than 16k), depending on the
combination of themes used. I did not address this error in my scripts, despite taking precautions
(like diving in parts the largest Themes from phase 3) as I am just trying to demonstrate an
improved prompting and process for building personas. Nonetheless if the proposed process was
to go into production it would be necessary to ensure that the length of the combination of Themes
is not too big so as to produce the error, of which an example is presented in Figure 4.




Figure 5 – Max Tokens error still produced occasionally, depending on combination of Themes
Results of Thematic Analysis
This section presents the results of this work. We will start considering some elements of the
Thematic Analysis and in particular examples of codes and the full list of Themes generated by
the model, before looking at some examples of Personas generated by the LLM from the analysis.


Codes
Phase 2 of TA relates to the initial generation of codes. In the approach discussed here as described
earlier I asked the model to generate four sets of initial codes from the same dataset. Each set is
directed by a simple definition of what the codes should be about. Some examples of the generated
codes are shown below, for illustrative purposes and for providing an idea about the structure of
the codes. We can see from these examples that the model does reasonably well in identifying the
specific user aspects. Behaviours encompass for instance the need to validate in the field
information found online, or the user/farmer seeking out others for collaboration. Personality traits
encompass for instance persistence or the user being open-minded to innovation. Goals include for
instance the need to obtain information online that can be trusted or information which clearly
explains agriculture regulations. Lastly Frustrations encompass aspects such as finding unreliable
information online, or dislike of websites with a lot of adverts.
 Set/Codes       Code             Description                 Quote
 Example         Example
                 Validation       The user uses digital       But then I also go to the field to to
                                  tools to locate problems    validate what is a problem, because
                                  but validates them by       obviously digital toll can you tell
                                  going to the field to       you a lot but sometimes it's not
                                  ensure that the problem     enough.
                                  is correctly identified.
                 Problem-         The behaviour of            I looked online at what other
                 solving          seeking out solutions to    options were available. A thermal
                 online           specific problems           camera, for example, was one of
 Behaviours                       online, such as using a     the options. A cow's temperature
                                  thermal camera to           raises just before she calves. You
                                  monitor cows during         can use this heat camera to
                                  calving.                    measure the bodily temperature.
                 Professional     The behaviour of users      It is possible to connect advocacy
                 collaboration    collaborating with          and various professional
                                  advocacy and                organizations and everyone in the
                                  professional                same way. There is no problem
                                  organizations through a     with that.
                                  given product
                 Persistence      The ability to continue     The really small businesses with an
                                  working towards a goal      unclear name. So I also worked a
                                  despite obstacles or        lot with raindance, that's a good
                                  challenges
                                                        name. That's something that you
                                                        can not mistake.
Personality   Visionary     The interviewee is          I'm already beyond that. But this is
traits                      forward-thinking and        kind of basic for everyone. So I I
                            believes that digital tools hope that all of those tools will be
                            should be basic for         made more easy to accept by most
                            everyone, and that future farmers, by the 80 percent who
                            tools should integrate      could actually use them. And
                            feedback from               maybe today's only 20 percent who
                            consumers and               are already using them. So so there
                            processors to provide       is still some some progress to be
                            guarantees about the        made there in the interface so that
                            way food is produced        it's more user friendly...I believe
                            and processed.              tomorrow's tool will not only
                                                        integrate on farm level but also the
                                                        food chain and provides some
                                                        guarantees somewhere to say yes,
                                                        indeed this food was produced and
                                                        processed by those companies and
                                                        those farmers in such and such
                                                        conditions.
              Open-         The willingness to          It is good to have the tool as
              mindedness    consider new ideas and      complex as possible. Good
                            perspectives.               experience with new tools.
              Contacting    The interviewee's goal is And then just to come to got to that
              businesses    to contact businesses       contact forms, by phone, I prefer.
                            that produce sensors for But also with the e-mails and stuff
                            agriculture through         like that.
                            phone, email, and
                            contact forms on their
                            websites.
Goals         Trustworthy   The interviewee needs       We need trustable information,
              Information   trustworthy information information on the parcels, to
                            related to parcels, forest become forest or not, and manure
                            expansion, and manure. (fertilizer, slurry, and solid
                                                        manure).
              Clear         The interviewee needs a Clear explanation (lay language) on
              Explanation   clear explanation of        everything what is needed for the
              of            regulations related to the farm and also next to the farm,
              Regulations   expansion of forest         especially about the expansion of
                            plots, manure balance,      forest plots and regulatory issues,
                            and other farm-related      manure balance.
                            issues.
              Dislike of    The interviewee dislikes The search engines that are
              search        search engines with         sponsored by whatever. That's why
                            advertising, finding        I don't like the Mozillas and all of
                 engines with    them less clear than      those other stuff, because they are
                 advertising     Google.                   always, there is a lot of advertising
                                                           on.
                Incomplete       Frustration with digital  I had some tools which were
                Tools            tools that are incomplete incomplete somehow, but that
 Frustrations                    and cannot fulfill all    could not fulfill all of that I wanted
                                 desired functions         from them.
                Unreliable       The interviewee           Often information that is given
                Information      expresses frustration     cannot be trusted e.g. information
                                 with unreliable           given by 'Natuur en Bos' (Dpt of
                                 information.              the Flemish Government), they
                                                           give information on which birds
                                                           you can shoot, who are damaging
                                                           the cornfields (=fodder for the
                                                           cattle), is not to be trusted.
Table 4 - Example of initial codes generated by the model


Themes
The following tables present all the Themes generated by the model using the four set of codes, as
input in the prompt presented in Figure 2. The Themes and the related description are presented in
the same order as produced by the model and with the verbatim output (i.e. no change to the text
was made by the author, for example the word group is used instead of Theme in the description
as this was the instruction in the prompt which the model has reused).


                                           Behaviour
 Theme           Description
 Online          This group includes topics related to the behavior of accessing information
 Information     online, such as searching for information, using digital tools, and filtering
 Access and      out misleading information. It also includes topics related to the preference
 Behavior        for practical and illustrated content, as well as the importance of trustworthy
                 and reliable online sources.
 Offline         This group includes topics related to the behavior of exchanging
 Information     information with colleagues offline, attending meetings and conferences,
 Exchange and    and collaborating with other farmers, researchers, and advisors. It also
 Collaboration   includes topics related to the preference for offline sources of information,
                 such as journals and local meetings.
 Language        This group includes topics related to language preferences for accessing
 Preferences and information online, as well as the impact of answer depth and information
 Information     source on language choice. It also includes topics related to the use of
 Source          different sources of information, such as scientific institutions and social
                 media platforms.
 Farm             This group includes topics related to the use of digital tools for farm
 Management       management and monitoring, such as tracking animal fertility, controlling
 and Monitoring   processes, and measuring aspects of work that cannot be measured with the
                  naked eye.
 Trust in         This group includes topics related to the level of trust in different
 Information      information sources, such as online sources, scientific institutions, and
 Sources          social media platforms. It also includes topics related to the preference for
                  more reliable sources of information and the skepticism towards
                  manufacturer claims.
 Collaboration    This group includes topics related to the behavior of collaborating with
 and Information colleagues, exchanging experiences, and sharing information in forums and
 Sharing          professional organizations. It also includes topics related to the willingness
                  to share problems and collaborate with others in the same field.
 Preferences for This group includes topics related to the preference for visual learning and
 Visual Learning content, such as videos and diagrams. It also includes topics related to the
 and Content      use of YouTube videos as a reliable source of information.
 Preferences for This group includes topics related to the preference for traditional methods
 Traditional      of communication and problem-solving over digital ones. It also includes
 Methods and      topics related to the value placed on practical experience, learning from
 Analog           older beekeepers, and the input of experts in the field.
 Communication
 Importance of    This group includes topics related to the importance of reliable and user-
 Reliable and     friendly digital tools in agriculture. It also includes topics related to the
 User-Friendly    desire for personalized and intuitive interfaces, as well as the emphasis on
 Digital Tools    profitability and environmental impact.
  Information     This group includes topics related to the process of gathering information
 Gathering and    and solving professional problems, both online and offline. It also includes
 Problem-         topics related to the use of digital tools to solve professional problems and
 Solving          the reliance on practical experience and learning from others.
 Use of Digital   This group includes topics related to the use of digital tools for specific
 Tools for        purposes in agriculture, such as beekeeping, farm management, and seeking
 Specific         information on agricultural machinery and equipment.
 Purposes
Table 5 – Themes: Behaviour




                                       Personality Traits
 Theme           Description
 Digital Savvy   This group includes topics related to the use of digital tools and
                 technologies, including digital skills, using online resources, and seeking
                 information through Google and other digital platforms.
 Problem-solving This group includes topics related to the ability to analyze and evaluate
 Skills          information to make informed decisions and solve problems.
 Attention to        This group includes topics related to being meticulous and thorough in
 Detail              attending to details, paying close attention to small details, and ensuring
                     accuracy.
 Collaboration       This group includes topics related to valuing working effectively with others
 and Information     towards a common goal and sharing knowledge and expertise.
 Sharing
 Sustainability    This group includes topics related to concern for the environment and
                   finding sustainable practices to reduce carbon emissions.
 Willingness to    This group includes topics related to the desire to learn and explore new
 Learn and Adapt information and knowledge, being open to new ideas and perspectives, and
                   adapting to new technologies and methods.
 Traditional       This group includes topics related to valuing traditional methods and
 Values            relationships in the agricultural world, social interaction, and relationships.
Table 6 – Themes: Personality Traits




                                              Goals
 Theme               Description
 Farming             This group focuses on topics related to accessing information and
 Information and     knowledge about farming practices, regulations, technologies, and
 Knowledge           innovations. It includes topics about staying informed, accessing
 Access              trustworthy information, learning from industry professionals, and utilizing
                     digital tools for farming operations.
 Digital Tools for   This group focuses on topics related to the use of digital tools for farm
 Farm                management, including data management, monitoring, problem-solving,
 Management          decision-making, and communication. It includes topics about the
                     development and usability of digital tools, as well as the benefits and
                     challenges of using them.
 Accessible and      This group focuses on topics related to the accessibility and user-
 User-Friendly       friendliness of digital tools for farmers. It includes topics about
 Digital Tools       smartphone compatibility, customization options, overview of important
                     data, ease of use, and support systems for farmers using digital tools.
 Agricultural        This group focuses on topics related to incorporating digital tools into
 Education and       agricultural education and training. It includes topics about vocational
 Training            training, online courses, and platforms for learning and obtaining licenses.
 Precision           This group focuses on topics related to precision agriculture and crop
 Agriculture and     management using digital tools. It includes topics about real-time
 Crop                monitoring, early detection of crop issues, data validation, and reducing
 Management          the use of chemicals.
 Language and        This group focuses on topics related to language and localization in digital
 Localization        tools for agriculture. It includes topics about providing content in local
                     languages, avoiding the need for learning new languages, and focusing on
                     agronomy as the core business.
 Animal Breeding This group focuses on topics related to animal breeding and livestock
 and Livestock     management using digital tools. It includes topics about improving animal
 Management        breeding processes, monitoring flock health, and utilizing online resources
                   for livestock management.
 Organic Farming This group focuses on topics related to organic farming, sustainability, and
 and               conservation. It includes topics about staying informed about regulations
 Sustainability    and practices, implementing good agricultural practices, and exploring
                   possibilities for compensation.
 Agricultural      This group focuses on topics related to the agricultural market and
 Market and        competitiveness. It includes topics about using digital tools for market
 Competitiveness feedback, testing new ideas and innovations, and staying ahead of the
                   competition.
 Information       This group focuses on topics related to verifying and ensuring the
 Verification and reliability of information in the agricultural field. It includes topics about
 Reliability       filtering information, trusting digital knowledge from reliable sources, and
                   verifying information found online.
 Specific Farming This group focuses on topics related to specific farming practices and
 Practices and     topics. It includes topics about machinery, crop issues, regulations, animal
 Topics            breeding, and managing fauna in the area.
Table 7 – Themes: Goals


                                          Frustrations
 Theme              Description
 Frustration with   This group includes topics that express frustration with difficulties in
 Digital Tools      accessing information online, such as network availability issues, poorly
 and Technology     maintained websites, language barriers, and the abundance of irrelevant or
                    misleading information. It also includes frustrations with the lack of
                    reliable sources, the need to verify information, and the difficulty in finding
                    specific information or solutions to problems.
 Frustration with   This group includes topics that express frustration with the lack of reliable
 Information and    and trustworthy information, difficulties in finding specific information,
 Knowledge          and the need for clear explanations and solutions. It also includes
                    frustrations with the lack of collaboration, limited access to relevant
                    magazines, and the lack of information on specific topics or practices.
 Frustration with   This group includes topics that express frustration with agricultural
 Agricultural       practices and regulations, such as difficulties in calculating feed rations,
 Practices and      expanding forest plots, and filling production gaps. It also includes
 Regulations        frustrations with the lack of clear information, politicized information, and
                    the uncertainty of compensation for good practices.
 Frustration with   This group includes topics that express frustration specifically related to
 Beekeeping         beekeeping, such as difficulties in accessing education, relying on practical
                    experience, lack of trust in digital sources, and the need for necessary
                    digital skills. It also includes frustrations with irrelevant or inaccurate
                    information and the lack of complete solutions from digital tools.
 Frustration with  This group includes topics that express frustration with language barriers,
 Language          such as difficulties in accessing or understanding information online due to
 Barriers          language limitations.
 Frustration with  This group includes topics that express frustration with the lack of visual
 Lack of Visual    aids, such as photos and videos, to aid in identifying diseases and other
 Aids              issues in farming.
 Frustration with  This group includes topics that express frustration with limited access to
 Limited Access    information, such as offline sources being relied upon due to limited
 to Information    availability, lack of a central platform for agriculture information, and the
                   small market and lack of big companies in certain regions.
 Frustration with This group includes topics that express frustration with the lack of training
 Lack of Training and education, such as not having completed a particular training or
 and Education     education, difficulties in using digital tools due to lack of training, and the
                   lack of clear vision for the role of digital tools in the future of agriculture.
 Frustration with This group includes topics that express frustration with the abundance of
 Information       information online, such as sifting through irrelevant or politicized
 Overload          information, the need to verify information, and feeling overwhelmed by
                   the amount of information available.
 Frustration with This group includes topics that express frustration with communication and
 Communication collaboration, such as difficulties in personalizing digital tools, accessing
 and               important data, spreading information about events and programs, and the
 Collaboration     lack of user-generated content and exchange of information in the
                   agricultural world.
Table 8 – Themes: Frustrations




Write-up: Personas
In the following, four examples of Personas generated by the model with the prompt of Figure 3
and using the proposed workflow (Figure 4) and the Themes, are presented. This in effect amounts
to Phase 6 of TA. The list of the underlying Themes to each Persona is also provided. Pictures of
Personas were generated with Dall-e using part of the Personas narrative. Further examples of
Personas are included in the appendix for reference.
Persona – Example 1

Name and surname: Sofia Müller
Country: Germany
Age: Young age




Goal & Frustration: Sofia's main goal is to access trustworthy information related to her
farming activities. Her main frustration is the lack of reliable sources of information.

Quote: "We need trustable information, information on the parcels, to become forest or not,
and manure (fertilizer, slurry, and solid manure)."

Narrative: Sofia Müller is a young farmer from Germany. She comes from a farming family
and has been involved in the agricultural industry since she was a child. Sofia is passionate
about sustainable farming practices and has a strong commitment to protecting the
environment. She believes that farming can be part of the solution in reducing carbon
emissions and preserving natural resources. However, Sofia often struggles with finding
reliable information and resources to support her sustainable farming practices. She is
frustrated by the lack of trustworthy information related to topics such as soil fertility, forest
expansion, and manure management. Sofia is determined to find solutions to these challenges
in order to enhance her farming practices and contribute to a more sustainable agricultural
industry.

Additional goals:
- Accessing relevant information on farming regulations and environmental practices
- Connecting with other farmers to exchange experiences and learn about best practices

Additional frustrations:
- Difficulty in finding information in her local language
- Limited accessibility of digital tools due to their high cost and lack of compatibility with
small farms

Behaviour:
- Sofia pays close attention to details and regulations related to her farm, ensuring accuracy in
her work.
- She is cautious about the source of information and filters it to ensure reliability.
- Sofia is open to technological solutions and digital tools to improve her farming practices.

Personality:
- Sofia is detail-oriented and meticulous in attending to the details of her work.
- She has a strong sense of environmental consciousness and is committed to finding
sustainable practices.
- Sofia values reliability and prefers more trustworthy and scientific sources of information.
Themes Used in Example 1
Goals              Information Verification and              Agricultural Education and
                   Reliability                               Training
Frustrations       Frustration with Lack of Training         Frustration with Communication
                   and Education                             and Collaboration
Behaviour          Trust in Information Sources              Farm Management and
                                                             Monitoring
Personality             Attention to Detail                  Sustainability




Persona – Example 2

Name: Mario Rossi
Country: Italy
Age: Middle-aged


Name: Mario Rossi

Country: Italy

Age: Middle-aged

Goal & Frustration: Mario's main goal is to increase digitalization in his farming practices to
improve efficiency and decision-making. His main frustration is the lack of user-friendly and
centralized digital tools that provide all the necessary information in one place.

Quote: "Digital sources will become even more important in the future than they already are
today."

Narrative: Mario is a middle-aged farmer from Italy who is passionate about sustainable
agriculture and finding ways to improve his farming practices. He is open to new ideas and
technologies that can help him optimize his work and reduce his environmental impact. Mario
has a strong desire to learn and explore new information, regularly seeking out information
online and reading magazines to stay updated on the latest agricultural practices.

Additional goals:
- To use digital tools for precise and efficient farming operations
- To receive market feedback for better decision-making

Additional frustrations:
- Limited access to information from neighboring countries due to language barriers
- Lack of visual aids, such as photos and videos, to aid in identifying diseases and other issues
in farming
Behaviour:
- Problem-solving online: Mario actively seeks out solutions to specific problems online.
- Trust in digital tools: Mario trusts digital tools for farm management and crop monitoring,
but still wants to make the final decision as a human operator.
- Information-seeking: Mario filters information to ensure it is correct and reliable, and prefers
practical and illustrated content.

Personality:
- Curiosity: Mario has a strong desire to learn and explore new information and knowledge.
- Openness to Learning: Mario is willing to learn and adapt to new technologies and methods.
- Environmental consciousness: Mario is aware of the impact of farming on the environment
and is interested in finding sustainable practices to reduce carbon emissions.


Themes Used in Example 2
Goals              Digital Tools for Farm                     Agricultural Education and
                   Management (part 1)                        Training
Frustrations       Frustration with Limited Access            Frustration with Lack of Visual
                   to Information                             Aids
Behaviour          Online Information Access and              Importance of Reliable and User-
                   Behavior (part 2)                          Friendly Digital Tools
Personality        Willingness to Learn and Adapt             Sustainability




Persona – Example 3

Name and surname: João Silva
Country: Portugal
Age: Middle-aged



Goal & Frustration: João's main goal is to improve animal breeding processes and
monitoring for his farm. His main frustration is the difficulty in finding reliable and immediate
information online.

Quote: "If you have a problem out in the field, it is best to find a solution immediately.
Otherwise, if you have to sit down again in the evening to look something up or read
something, it won't work."

Narrative: João Silva is a middle-aged farmer from Portugal. He has been running his farm
for several years and is interested in implementing digital tools to improve animal breeding
processes and monitor livestock health. He is frustrated with the difficulties of finding reliable
information online and often relies on offline sources, such as local meetings and journals, f or
information.

Additional goals:
- Improve efficiency and productivity through mechanization.
- Find solutions to specific problems related to livestock and farming techniques.

Additional frustrations:
- Difficulty in accessing information due to language barriers.
- Overload of irrelevant information when searching online.

Behaviour:
- Immediately seeks solutions to problems by accessing information online.
- Regularly uses specific websites for information.
- Relies on offline sources, such as local meetings and journals.

Personality:
- Digital literacy: Skilled in using digital tools and platforms.
- Innovative: Open to new developments in technology and digital solutions.
- Resourceful: Seeks information directly from sources and finds creative solutions.


Themes Used in Example 3
Goals              Animal Breeding and Livestock              Precision Agriculture and Crop
                   Management                                 Management
Frustrations       Frustration with Accessing                 Frustration with Beekeeping
                   Information Online (part 1)
Behaviour          Online Information Access and              Information Gathering and
                   Behavior (part 1)                          Problem-Solving
Personality        Digital Savvy (part 1)                     Attention to Detail




Persona – Example 4

Name: Lucia Rossi
Country: Italy
Age: Middle age



Goal & Frustration: Lucia's main goal is to stay up-to-date with the latest information and
knowledge related to the agricultural sector. Her frustration lies in the lack of immediate
access to information when needed.

She says, "If you have a problem out in the field, it is best to find a solution immediately."
Narrative: Lucia Rossi is a 45-year-old farmer from Italy. She has been running her family
farm for the past 20 years and has experience in dairy farming. Lucia is passionate about
organic farming and sustainability practices. She values traditional methods and beli eves in the
importance of the farmer's expertise. Lucia focuses on staying informed about new regulations
and technologies in order to optimize her farming operations and improve profitability. She
relies on offline sources of information, such as local meetings with dairy farmers, agricultural
journals, and TV programs on rural development. Lucia seeks advice from her family,
veterinarians, and other farmers to solve problems and make informed decisions. She also
values social interaction and relationships within the agricultural community, as she believes
in the power of sharing experiences and exchanging information. Lucia is conscious of the
impact of farming on the environment and is interested in finding ways to reduce carbon
emissions.

Additional Goals:
- Accessing relevant information about dairy farming regulations and expansion of forest plots
- Building a network and collaborating with other farmers and industry professionals

Additional Frustrations:
- Difficulty typing search queries due to language barriers
- Lack of visuals in digital sources to aid in identifying diseases and other issues in farming

Behaviors:
- Problem-solving online by searching for solutions to specific problems
- Seeking advice from family, veterinarians, and other farmers
- Preference for visual learning and content, such as videos and diagrams

Personality Traits:
- Seeking advice and valuing traditional methods and relationships
- Nostalgic and appreciative of the past
- Environmental conscious and interested in finding sustainable practices


Themes Used in Example 4
Goals              Organic Farming and                       Farming Information and
                   Sustainability                            Knowledge Access (part 1)
Frustrations       Frustration with Accessing                Frustration with Lack of Visual
                   Information Online (part 1)               Aids
Behaviour          Online Information Access and             Preferences for Visual Learning
                   Behavior (part 2)                         and Content
Personality        Traditional Values                        Sustainability
Discussion
This paper sought to extend work previously done by the author in performing phase 6 of Thematic
Analysis conducted with LLMs, for writing-up user personas. The paper has proposed an improved
prompting and process to use the results of a Thematic Analysis for creating Personas. It constitutes
therefore an incremental improvement on the previous process. The impetus for this work came
from some recent developments. First, the release of a LLM (GPT3.5Turbo-16k) which allows the
processing of a reasonably large number of tokens, therefore allowing larger prompts,
accommodating the use of several Themes, and larger responses with the production of richer
Personas. A second, and more important, aspect are the reflections on the impact of LLM on UX
research, and comments (presented in the introduction) on whether LLM can capture aspects such
as user behaviour of personality traits of users.
We will start reflecting on the second point. Overall looking at the Themes in Table 5 and 6 in
particular it does seem that the model, has some capacity to identify behaviour and personality
traits of users from interview data, when instructed with a simple definition inside the prompt for
the definition of initial codes. This then can lead to Themes which capture these aspects of the
users. For example, captured behaviours (as Themes) include the like of how the user accesses
online or offline information, collaboration with other actors (e.g. other farmers, agricultural
specialists) or the use of digital tools to manage farms. Personality traits instead include the like
of being a person attentive to details, being open to collaboration with others in agriculture, or
being attentive to traditional values in agriculture. There are some occasional instances where
perhaps the Themes do not capture entirely well either behaviour or personality traits, of which
possibly the clearest example is the Theme “Problem Solving Skills” in the Personality Traits set,
which the model defined as the “ability to analyze and evaluate information to make informed
decisions and solve problems.”. This appears possibly more a behaviour than something relating
to the personality of the user, and it may be due to the definition of personality Traits used in the
prompt which also hints at behaviours. In this work I did not operate Phases 4 of Thematic
Analysis, which relates to revising the Themes, the “Problem Solving Skills” thus might have been
dropped in phase 4, and I believe generally therefore that the fact that very few time may not match
with the definition of what the model was supposed to capture, does not generally invalidate the
model’s capacity to perform at least satisfactorily the analysis of user interview data. As we started
the paper reflecting on the observation by a leading UX scholar that LLMs may not be able to
capture aspects of the user behaviour, I would suggest that LLMs can with proper prompting and
good quality data identify at least some aspects of user behaviour (and personality traits) that can
serve some of the work of UX researchers. It is clear that these proposed here are just some
preliminary observations and more work will be needed, however.


The second aspect we need to reflect on is the use of the large GPT model supporting the
processing (prompt + response) of 16 thousand tokens, and the consequent possibility to create an
improved process and prompting for User Personas. The proposed workflow used 4 sets of Themes
and from each of these, two Themes are then selected (randomly) to create Personas. Therefore 4
tuples (8 Themes in total) are passed inside the prompt, and the proposed prompt instructs the
model about the structure of the Personas. Overall, the model does well in using the materials from
the Themes to build compelling Personas. Behaviours and Personality Traits are also well
presented. Although these appear as bullet points in the Personas, they are also picked up by the
model in the extended narrative of the Personas. Take for example this passage from the Persona
2 (Mario) narrative where the model states that “He is open to new ideas”, this is also then reflected
in the separate Personality Traits list as “Openness to learning”. Likewise in the Persona 4 (Lucia)
the narrative describes that “She values traditional methods and believes in the importance of the
farmer's expertise.” and the bullet points list shows a Personality Trait related to “Nostalgic and
appreciative of the past”. Behaviours present a similar pattern, for instance in the Persona 3 the
model picks up that João “Relies on offline sources, such as local meetings and journals.”, which
is also reflected in the bullet points list. Likewise in Persona 1, the model stipulates in the narrative
that “Sofia often struggles with finding reliable information and resources to support her
sustainable farming practices”, which also is reflected in the Behaviours list. We had already
observed in previous work (see De Paoli, 2023b), that the model also does well in showing a good
quote for illustrating the main goal of the Personas, and this capacity is again reproduced in the
Personas shown in this paper. Just as an example, we can look at Persona 2, where “Mario's main
goal is to increase digitalization in his farming practices to improve efficiency and decision -
making". The quote retrieved from original interview data then is as follows: "Digital sources will
become even more important in the future than they already are today.".
As previously argued (De Paoli 2023b), the Personas that can be generated using LLMs and
qualitative data should probably be assumed more as canvas than finished products, to be reviewed
and potentially enriched by researchers/practitioners, before to be used for the UX process. Whilst
workflows different than the one proposed here may be developed, the random selection of Them es
from a pool of different sets of Themes, allows significant variety due to the high number of
possible combinations. In this research for example 40 original Themes were produced (divided
into 4 sets) and 8 are used each time, randomly selected. With this number the possible
combinations C(n,r)=C(40,8) well reach above 76 million, offering potential significant variety
and the possibility for researchers to generate and select the initial canvas that better represent their
users.
As discussed in the literature review, LLMs generated Personas, based on qualitative data and
analysis could probably be seen as a middle ground between the “more traditional” qualitative
Personas crafted entirely by researchers from qualitative data (and related analysis) and the data-
driven personas, reusing a pool of existing data such as analytics or surveys, and often crafted with
the support of algorithms. This middle ground is perhaps evident, since the LLMs generated
Personas can rely on the richness of qualitative data, but at the same on the capacity of AI solutions
to scale up the process of Personas creation. More work however will be required to understand
how LLMs personas relate to existing literature and practice
The final point of the discussion should touch on the role of LLMs in UX research. Whilst the use
of LLM for building Personas is just one potential application of these innovations that may affect
UX research, it is evident there is some potential to explore. Again, the approach should be one of
Human-AI collaboration where the work of researchers is enhanced and facilitated by these
technologies.


Limitations
As we observed, even using a LLM which allows the processing of 16 thousand tokens the size of
certain Themes (when brought together with others in the randomised selection) would produce
the max tokens limit error of the model. As said earlier, I did not write python code to overcome
the error (which could have simply entailed a pre-check of the length of the combined tuples), as
my goal here was demonstrative in terms of producing a richer set of Personas from an LLM drive
TA. However, should a similar type of workflow be adopted in production, then avoiding from the
outset the error will become important. One recommendation would be to establish a max length
for each of the generated Themes, so that each random composition of tuple can be processed by
the model without this error.


Conclusion
This draft manuscript has presented and discussed an improved prompting and process for creating
User Personas with an LLM, based on the results of a TA of qualitative interviews also performed
with the same LLM. A workflow for creating user personas has been discussed and the results of
the analysis and a set of Personas were articulated, presented and discussed. Whilst this is just an
incremental contribution to previous work, it offers a further step toward understanding LLMs
potential use in research in the social sciences.




References
Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2006). Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative research in
psychology, 3(2), 77-101.
Chew, R., Bollenbacher, J., Wenger, M., Speer, J., & Kim, A. (2023). LLM-Assisted Content
Analysis: Using Large Language Models to Support Deductive Coding. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2306.14924.
Cooper, A., Reimann, R., & Cronin, D. (2007). About face 3: The essentials of interaction
design. Wiley Publishing.
De Paoli, S. (2023a). Can Large Language Models emulate an inductive Thematic Analysis of
semi-structured interviews? An exploration and provocation on the limits of the approach and the
model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13014.
De Paoli, S. (2023b). Writing user personas with Large Language Models: Testing phase 6 of a
Thematic Analysis of semi-structured interviews. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.18099.
Jansen, B. J., Salminen, J., Jung, S. G., & Guan, K. (2022). Data-driven personas. Springer
Nature.
Jansen, B. J., Salminen, J. O., & Jung, S. G. (2020). Data-driven personas for enhanced user
understanding: Combining empathy with rationality for better insights to analytics. Data and
Information Management, 4(1), 1-17.
Harley, A. (2015). Personas make users memorable for product team members. Nielsen Norman
Group, 16. https://www.nngroup.com/articles/persona/
Nielsen, L., & Hansen, F. (2008). Communicating user experience: Applying local usability in
the design process. Journal of Usability Studies, 3(3), 143-154.
McGinn, J., & Kotamraju, N. (2008, April). Data-driven persona development. In Proceedings of
the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems (pp. 1521-1524).
Rosala, M. (2019). How to analyze qualitative data from UX research: Thematic analysis. NN-
Nielsen Norman Group. Available from: https://www.nngroup.com/articles/thematic-analysis/
Saldaña, J. (2021). The coding manual for qualitative researchers. sage.
Salminen, J., Jansen, B.J., An, J., Kwak, H., Jung, SG. (2019). Automatic Persona Generation for
Online Content Creators: Conceptual Rationale and a Research Agenda. In: Personas - User
Focused Design. Human–Computer Interaction Series. Springer, London.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4471-7427-1_8
Salminen, J., Guan, K., Jung, S. G., & Jansen, B. J. (2021). A survey of 15 years of data-driven
persona development. International Journal of Human–Computer Interaction, 37(18), 1685-
1708.
Salminen, J., Froneman, W., Jung, S. G., Chowdhury, S., & Jansen, B. J. (2020, April). The
ethics of data-driven personas. In Extended Abstracts of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 1-9).
Schiavone, W., Roberts, C., Du, D., Sauro, J. and Lewis J. (2023). Can ChatGPT Replace UX
Researchers? An Empirical Analysis of Comment Classifications. Online post, available at:
https://measuringu.com/classification-agreement-between-ux-researchers-and-chatgpt/
Vágó S., and Spanoghe P. (2023). EUREKA WP2: Regional Interview Transcripts [Data set].
Zenodo. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7571028
White, J., Fu, Q., Hays, S., Sandborn, M., Olea, C., Gilbert, H., ... & Schmidt, D. C. (2023). A
prompt pattern catalog to enhance prompt engineering with chatgpt. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2302.11382
Zhang, Z., Ning, Z., Xu, C., Tian, Y., & Li, T. J. J. (2023). PEANUT: A Human-AI
Collaborative Tool for Annotating Audio-Visual Data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15167.
Appendix – Additional examples of Personas
Further example 1
Name: Ana Popescu
Country: Romania
Age: Middle-aged

Goal & Frustration: Ana's main goal is to access reliable information and resources in
beekeeping to improve her practices. Her main frustration is the lack of reliable sources and
the need for necessary digital skills.

Quote: "They don't have good digital skills. And so everything should be very intuitive."

Narrative: Ana Popescu is a middle-aged beekeeper from Romania. She has been passionate
about beekeeping since she was young and has dedicated her life to this profession. She
manages her own bee farm and is continuously looking for ways to improve her practices and
expand her knowledge. Ana believes that access to reliable information is crucial for the
success of her beekeeping business.

Additional goals:
1. Networking and collaboration with other beekeepers to exchange experiences and
knowledge.
2. Staying up-to-date with the latest developments and technologies in beekeeping.

Additional frustrations:
1. Difficulty in finding accurate and relevant information for her specific needs.
2. Lack of digital literacy and necessary digital skills to effectively use digital tools.

Behaviour:
1. Ana actively searches for reliable sources and verifies information before applying it in her
practices.
2. She is meticulous and pays close attention to details in her beekeeping practices.
3. Ana prefers to collaborate with other beekeepers and industry experts to exchange
experiences and gain knowledge.

Personality:
1. Detail-oriented: Ana pays close attention to small details and ensures accuracy in her
practices.
2. Problem-solving: She actively seeks solutions to challenges in her beekeeping business.
3. Strategic thinking: Ana analyzes and evaluates information to make informed decisions for
her bee farm.
Themes Used in Further example 1
Goals               Language and Localization                 Organic Farming and
                                                              Sustainability
Frustrations            Frustration with Beekeeping           Frustration with Accessing
                                                              Information Online
Behaviour               Trust in Information Sources          Farm Management and
                                                              Monitoring
Personality             Attention to Detail                   Problem-solving Skills




Further example 2
Name: Maria Lopez
Country: Spain
Age: Middle age

Goal & Frustration:
Goal: Maria's main goal is to access trustworthy information related to parcels, forest
expansion, and manure in order to make informed decisions and improve her farming
practices.
Quote: "We need trustable information, information on the parcels, to become forest or not,
and manure (fertilizer, slurry, and solid manure)."

Narrative: Maria Lopez, a middle-aged farmer from Spain, is deeply passionate about
agriculture and the environment. She runs a small farm where she practices sustainable
farming methods and strives to find ways to reduce carbon emissions. Maria is frustrated by
the lack of clear and reliable information regarding parcel management, forest expansion, and
manure. She wants to make informed decisions about these practices, but finding trustworthy
information has been a challenge. Maria is dedicated to staying informed about the latest
developments in the agricultural sector and is always seeking innovative solutions to improve
her farming operation. She is open to using digital tools and technologies to make her work
easier and more efficient, but she values the final human decision-making process. Maria
believes that digital sources and platforms play a crucial role in providing information to
farmers and fostering collaboration among them. She is also concerned about the resistance to
change in traditional agriculture practices and hopes to see more farmers embrace digital tools
and new methods. Maria is eager to collaborate with other farmers and the Farmbook team to
share knowledge and best practices.

Additional goals:
- Access reliable information on animal breeding and problem-solving in livestock farming.
- Stay up-to-date with the latest developments in organic farming, regulations, and practices.

Additional frustrations:
- Limited international market access due to protectionism.
- Seasonal gaps in production that require additional efforts to fill.
Behaviour:
- Uses digital tools and platforms regularly to search for information and stay informed.
- Prefers visual and illustrated content for easy comprehension.
- Filters out irrelevant or unreliable information to find trustworthy sources.

Personality:
- Environmentally conscious with a focus on finding sustainable practices.
- Digitally literate and open to new technologies and innovations.
- Resourceful and innovative in seeking solutions to farming challenges.

Themes Used in Further example 2
Goals               Farming Information and                    Organic Farming and
                    Knowledge Access                           Sustainability
Frustrations        Frustration with Agricultural              'Frustration with Language
                    Practices and Regulations                  Barriers
Behaviour           Online Information Access and              Trust in Information Sources
                    Behavior (part 1)
Personality         Sustainability                             Digital Savvy (part 1)




Further example 3
Name: Maria Silva
Country: Portugal
Age: Middle age

Goal & Frustration: Maria's main goal is to access trustworthy and reliable information
related to farming practices and regulations. Her frustration is the difficulty of finding relevant
and accurate information online, as there is an abundance of irrelevant or misleading
information.

Quote: "The strongest are the government's portals which have good information and real."

Narrative: Maria is a middle-aged farmer from Portugal. She owns a small farm where she
raises livestock and cultivates crops. Maria is passionate about sustainable farming practices
and is always looking for ways to improve efficiency and reduce the environmental impact of
her farm. She values practical experience and learning from other farmers. However, she often
relies on online sources to gather information and stay informed about the latest farming
practices and regulations. Maria finds it frustrating to encounter poorly maintained websites,
language barriers, and an overwhelming amount of information that may not be relevant or
reliable. She believes that accessing trustworthy information is crucial for making informed
decisions and improving her farming practices.

Additional goals:
- To collaborate and exchange information with other farmers and industry professionals.
- To stay up-to-date with the latest innovations and technologies in farming.
Additional frustrations:
- Difficulty filtering out misleading information found online.
- Lack of user-friendly platforms and tools for accessing agricultural information.

Behaviour:
- Uses a smartphone as an essential tool for work and research.
- Relies on both online and offline sources to gather information.
- Prefers interactive and visual learning tools such as videos and images.

Personality:
- Attention to detail
- Environmental consciousness
- Concern for the use of sustainable farming practices



Themes Used in Further example 3
Goals               Language and Localization                Farming Information and
                                                             Knowledge Access

Frustrations            Frustration with Accessing           Frustration with Agricultural
                        Information Online (part 1)          Practices and Regulations
Behaviour               Use of Digital Tools for Specific    Information Gathering and
                        Purposes                             Problem-Solving
Personality             Attention to Detail                  Sustainability




Further example 4
Name and surname: Maria Rossi
Country: Italy
Age: Middle age

Goal & Frustration: Maria's main goal is to incorporate digital tools into her farm
management practices for precision agriculture and crop management. She is frustrated with
the lack of reliable and easy-to-use digital tools that provide accurate information and support
for her farm operations.

Quote: "Digital sources will become even more important in the future than they already are
today."

Narrative: Maria is a middle-aged farmer in Italy who owns a small farm that specializes in
both beef cattle and arable farming. She has a strong passion for sustainable farming practices
and is committed to finding innovative solutions to improve her farm's productivity while
minimizing the environmental impact. Maria is open to incorporating digital tools into her
farm management practices, but she has been struggling to find reliable and user-friendly
options that suit her specific needs. She often searches for information online in English, as
she believes it provides more in-depth answers and access to a wider range of resources. Maria
also values networking and collaboration with other farmers and experts in the field, attending
conferences and exchanging knowledge. She is actively looking for tools and platforms that
encourage collaboration and information sharing among farmers. Despite her interest in
technological solutions, Maria also relies on her own experience and the input of experts to
make informed decisions for her farm. She prioritizes trustable information sources, such as
governmental institutions and scientific organizations, and is skeptical of information found on
social media platforms and forums. Maria is committed to the long-term sustainability of her
farm and is motivated to find effective and practical digital tools that can support her in
achieving her goals.

Additional goals:
- Accessing reliable and local language resources for farm management
- Early identification of crop issues

Additional frustrations:
- Difficulty in finding practical and trustworthy digital tools for agro-technical operations
- Lack of user-generated content and collaboration platforms specific to agriculture

Behaviour:
- Maria actively seeks information online in different languages based on the depth of the
answers and the source of information.
- She prefers reliable sources of information and filters out misleading or irrelevant
information.
- Maria values collaboration and networking with other farmers and experts in the field.

Personality:
- Maria is environmentally conscious and prioritizes sustainable practices.
- She is willing to work with others and share knowledge and expertise to achieve common
goals.
- Maria is open-minded and adaptable to new technologies and digital tools.


Themes Used in Further Example 4
Goals                      Agricultural Education and             Precision Agriculture and
                           Training                               Crop Management
Frustrations               Frustration with Lack of               Frustration with
                           Visual Aid                             Communication and
                                                                  Collaboration
Behaviour                        Trust in Information Sources     Language Preferences and
                                                                  Information Source
Personality                      Sustainability                   Collaboration and
                                                                  Information Sharing
Further example 5
Name: Anna Schmidt
Country: Germany
Age: Middle age

Goal & Frustration: Anna's main goal is to access information from neighboring countries,
such as Bulgaria and Hungary, to improve her farming practices. Her main frustration is the
lack of access to information due to language barriers and limited information sharing.

Quote: "But I don't know what is happening in neighboring countries. Like Bulgaria or
Hungary, which have maybe similar conditions to mine. Even Serbia is not easy access as far
as information and maybe something that is happening in Germany or in Denmark could be of
interest for me also."

Narrative: Anna Schmidt is a 45-year-old farmer from Germany. She comes from a family
with a long history of farming and has been working on her own farm for over 20 years. Anna
is passionate about agriculture and is always looking for ways to improve her farming
practices. However, she faces the challenge of limited access to information, especially from
neighboring countries with similar conditions.

Anna spends her free time attending agricultural fairs and reading magazines to stay informed
about the latest trends and technologies in farming. She has a good relationship with her local
veterinarian, who provides valuable insights and knowledge. However, Anna believes that
there is a wealth of information available from other farmers and scientific institutions in
neighboring countries.

Anna is an innovative and resourceful farmer. She has developed her own web applications
and uses digital tools to monitor her crops and make data-driven decisions. Anna is open to
using new technologies and is willing to learn and adapt to them. She values efficiency and
believes that digital tools can greatly improve farm management practices.

Additional goals:
- Stay informed about the latest advancements in animal breeding techniques
- Find solutions to manage fauna in the area

Additional frustrations:
- Limited availability of information due to the small market and lack of big companies in
Germany
- Difficulty in understanding complicated digital tools due to lack of time and knowledge

Behaviour:
- Seeks information directly from reliable sources, such as scientific institutions and
manufacturers
- Uses digital tools and online resources effectively to gather information
- Relies on her own experience and experimentation to find solutions to problems

Personality:
- Curious and always eager to learn and explore new information and knowledge
- Open-minded and willing to embrace new ideas and technologies
- Resourceful and able to find creative solutions to problems.



Themes Used in Further Example 5
Goals               Specific Farming Practices and       Precision Agriculture and Crop
                    Topics                               Management
Frustrations        Frustration with Limited Access      Frustration with Lack of Training
                    to Information                       and Education
Behaviour           Trust in Information Sources         Farm Management and
                                                         Monitoring
Personality           Willingness to Learn and Adapt     Digital Savvy
