    Reflections on Inductive Thematic Saturation as a
     potential metric for measuring the validity of an
         inductive Thematic Analysis with LLMs

                Stefano De Paoli – Abertay University – s.depaoli@abertay.ac.uk


              Walter Stan Mathis – Yale Medical School - walter.mathis@yale.edu


[as this is a draft work-in-progress we are posting to foster discussion, please send
us comments, observations or if you spot errors, especially on how we propose to
                          calculate the Probability problem]


Abstract
This paper presents a set of reflections on saturation and the use of Large Language Models
(LLMs) for performing Thematic Analysis (TA). The paper suggests that initial thematic saturation
(ITS) could be used as a metric to assess part of the transactional validity of TA with LLM,
focusing on the initial coding. The paper presents the initial coding of two datasets of different
sizes, and it reflects on how the LLM reaches some form of analytical saturation during the coding.
The procedure proposed in this work leads to the creation of two codebooks, one comprising the
total cumulative initial codes and the other the total unique codes. The paper proposes a metric to
synthetically measure ITS using a simple mathematical calculation employing the ratio between
slopes of cumulative codes and unique codes. The paper contributes to the initial body of work
exploring how to perform qualitative analysis with LLMs.


Introduction
There is a nascent body of work exploring the use of Large Language Models (LLMs) for
performing qualitative coding (QC), Thematic Analysis (TA) and a few other types of Qualitative
Analysis (QA). LLMs are complex and sophisticated Machine Learning systems trained on a large
amount of textual data, can understand natural language, and generate linguistic responses. Some
known examples include the OpenAI GPT models (which are at the basis of ChatGPT), Palm
(which is at the basis of Google Bard) or Llama-2 from Meta/Facebook.
While initial evidence shows that something satisfactory can be derived by using LLMs for the
purpose of doing TA, we still are in a phase of methodological research where we need to consider

                                                1
if the output quality, we receive from LLMs is valid. In other words, we need to assess if an LLM-
performed TA is ‘good enough’: if a QC or TA performed with LLMs can have comparable
validity to one produced by an expert human researcher. Comparing themes produced by human
researchers and LLMs for TA has been used for example by the authors adopting a qualitative
textual comparison (De Paoli, 2023a). Drapal et al. (2023) used an LLM to support their TA of
court cases, evaluating also the results against human coder. In this paper we argue that a further
potential angle for assessing the quality and validity of LLM-driven QC analysis could be
considering the well-established notion of saturation.
The widespread understanding of saturation often comes from the definition given in the context
of Grounded Theory where this is understood to be “when no new information seems to emerge
from coding, that is, when no new properties, dimensions, conditions, actions/interactions or
consequences are seen in the data” (Strauss and Corbin, 1990, p. 136). This is very often
understood as a metric relating to the sampling of data, namely if saturation is not reached (i.e.
new information and consequently codes keep emerging from analysing interviews) researchers
are potentially advised to collect further data, since the existing sample of interviews is probably
not enough to describe or characterise the phenomenon under study, or to answer the research
question. In practice, however, there are various constraints to the application of the saturation on
the sample, such as the fact that often the number of e.g. interviews to be conducted in a defined
piece of research is declared in advance (Charmaz, 2014) for example to funding agencies. Braun
and Clarke (2021) also argued that data saturation is not always a significant metric for validity
for TA.
Empirical studies also have been conducted to assess how many interviews would be enough to
reach saturation to identify the optimal number of interviews. However, a clear agreement across
the research community does not seem to exist. For example, Hagaman et al. (2017), established
that 16 interviews were sufficient (in their research) to reach saturation and find common themes.
A recent systematic review of literature by Hennik and Kaiser (2022) identified that across all the
reviewed readings “an average of 12–13 interviews reached saturation”.                         Also,
mathematical/statistical models have been defined to measure saturation (see e.g. Guest et al., 2020
– which in addition offer a good overview of the literature on determining saturation). A useful
discussion is also offered by Saunders et al. (2018) which make a distinction between four types
of saturation: (1) theoretical saturation, which we can associate with measuring the sampling; (2)
inductive thematic saturation which relates to the emergence of new codes/categories and therefore
has an analytical purpose; (3) a priori thematic saturation, which relates to how the data exemplify
a pre-defined set of coding categories, and thus also has a sampling nature and (4) data saturation
which represents a measure of data redundancy and thus has a data collection purpose.
This granular categorisation of the forms of saturation by Saunders et al. (2018) gives us an
indication of how we could consider using the concept of saturation when using LLMs. Clearly
LLMs have no immediate role in defining the sample or in collecting data, however they assist in
the analysis. Thus, what Saunders et al. (2018) call ‘inductive thematic saturation’ (ITS) may be
considered a useful direction of investigation in order to bring the concept of saturation within the
realm of LLMs TA. The full definition of ITS that they provide is as follows, ITS: “focuses on the

                                                 2
identification of new codes or themes and is based on the number of such codes or themes rather
than the completeness of existing theoretical categories”. In other words, ITS does seem to
measure how codes saturate and this relates directly to the overall number of codes produced when
doing QC.
Our proposition is to look at ITS to assess if LLMs also produce such saturation, or at least
something looking like a form of ITS. In simple terms, we would expect that the codes produced
by an LLM start to repeat across the analysis of a dataset of interviews, up to the point in which in
the analysis of later interviews few or no new codes are identified by the LLM. If proved that
LLMs can produce ITS in inductive initial QC we could use this as one potential metric to assess
the validity of the LLM’s overall inductive Thematic Analysis. We could suggest this as one metric
for ‘transactional validity’ (TV) of LLMs’ TA, where TV is an approach that “assumes that
qualitative research can be more credible as long as certain techniques, methods, and/or strategies
are employed during the conduct of the inquiry.” (Cho and Trent, 2006, p. 322). Thus, if proven
that LLMs can produce some form of ITS, then measuring LLMs ITS might be used as one of the
proposed techniques to measure validity. In the context of this paper, we will apply this idea only
to phase 2 of Thematic Analysis (as per Braun and Clarke, 2006 six phases model), the initial
coding produced from an LLM.
In our previous proposition to perform a TA with LLMs, we presented an approach in which the
LLM (GPT3.5-Turbo) produces a set/pre-defined number of codes for each interview for a given
dataset (see De Paoli, 2023a). All these codes are generated independently for each interview (or
chunk/portion of interview) and are then collated together in a cumulative codebook. An entirely
a posteriori codebook reduction is then performed (again with the LLM) to identify duplicated
codes. This is because each interview is indeed coded independently with the LLM having no
knowledge or memory of the prior codes. To measure ITS, we propose in this paper that the
reduction of duplicated codes, rather than being performed entirely a posteriori on the whole
cumulative codebook, is instead performed after each interview. This should allow us to identify
which unique new codes are created by the LLMs after each interview, and the key assumption of
our work is that the absolute number of new codes given by the LLMs will decrease as the model
goes through the interview’s dataset. This should show therefore some form of ITS.
In the following pages, after offering a succinct review of the literature on using AI and LLMs for
QA, we will describe the methodology of our experiment for attempting to measure ITS, we will
present the results of the experiment including the definition of a possible metric for ITS, and we
will conclude with some reflection on the use of LLMs for QA.


Overview of the intersection between AI and QA
The intersection of QA with AI and Machine Learning (ML) is not something new in research
methodologies. Researchers have sought what could be considered a data-driven approach to
qualitative research, often within the broader field of Computational Social Sciences (CSS).
However, compared to ‘more traditional’ AI approaches such as Natural Language Processing (see
for example Franzosi et al., 2022) or Latent Dirichlet Allocation (see for example Evans, 2014; or
                                                 3
Jacobs & Tschötschel, 2019), LLMs offer a potentially novel paradigm due to their capacity to
manipulate and synthesize textual material, lowering the barriers for using AI for scholars with
less technical skill. In the text below, we offer a brief overview of some key contributions on the
intersection of QA and AI.
In an early work, Mason et al (2014) conceptualises the relation between QA and AI by
highlighting how both approaches can be used in CSS and social computing. QA can provide
insight into research questions and data sources, while ML and statistics contribute mathematical
models and computational tools. Therefore, in this contribution more than the direct use of AI for
QA, what we have is a complementarity of the approaches for CSS, with QA used to identify
potential data sources and computational techniques used for data processing and analysis.
Burscher et al. (2015) similarly conceptualises QA and AI as complementary. QA can provide
researchers with an in-depth understanding of the social context, and AI can support researchers
with larger analysis and generalisation of research results. Hence, for the authors, combining both
approaches can lead to more robust research. More recently, Christou (2023) also discusses QA
and AI as complementary approaches in CSS research, recognising the power of AI to aid human
researchers’ oversight of the analysis. Conversely, Papakyriakopoulos et al. (2021) advocates for
the adoption of QA in the ML development process. QA could play a role in supporting things
such as data selection, variable identification, and model architecture. QA integrated into AI
development could foster more fairness and a participatory design approach in AI development.
Edelman et al. (2020) conceptualise the relation between QA and AI by highlighting how CCS
applies computational methods to novel sources of digital data to develop theories of human
behavior. It discusses the integration of social science with computer science and emphasises the
fundamental role of sociological theory for CSS. Glinka and Müller-Birn (2023) explored the
human-AI collaboration in art historical image retrieval, emphasising AI's role in facilitating
critical reflection in the humanities. Longo (2019) explores the impact of artificial intelligence on
qualitative research methods in education and discusses how AI can be used to enhance teaching
and learning. The paper suggests that AI can empower qualitative research methods by providing
tools for data analysis or knowledge representation, among others. These are just some relevant
examples of the intersections between AI and QA.
Several authors have consequently proposed specific tools and methods, especially for performing
QA, which focus on initial coding and adopting a deductive approach. For example, Rietz et al.
(2020) introduce "Cody," an AI solution for qualitative coding whose goal is to offer support to
researchers to refine coding rules and perform manual annotations. This, in the authors’ intentions,
should bring better efficiency of the QC process and support coders inter-reliability. Chew et al.
(2023) propose the novel concept of Large Language Model-assisted Content Analysis (LACA)
which supports deductive coding with LLMs. In LACA, the codebook co-development and the
coding are therefore driven by LLMs. The authors also emphasise (like most of the research on AI
and QA) that LACA can support a reduction of the time and effort for performing a deductive CQ.
In a similar vein, Gao et al. (2023) introduces "CollabCoder" which includes features such as
LLM-generated code suggestions to better support collaborative CQ. Similarly, Gao et al. (2023)
introduces "CoAIcoder," as an AI-assisted coding tool which, similarly to CollabCoder, is meant


                                                 4
to improve collaboration between human researchers in QA. CoAIcoder also offers coding
suggestions and supports the identification of ‘coding conflicts’ between researchers.
The development of new tools is therefore one of the main directions of the intersection between
AI and QA. However, other contributions have focused on better understanding some of the
implications for theory and methods. Several works, including those by Chen et al., 2018, and
Gilles et al. (2018) have investigated the challenges of applying AI to QC. They emphasise the
complexities associated with identifying ambiguity in qualitative data. Rettberg (2022) poses an
interesting angle on the relation between QA and AI by proposing the use of algorithmic failure
as a method to identify interesting cases for qualitative research. It argues that failed predictions
in AI can reveal power dynamics and ambiguous situations that are of interest for QA. Also, others
have focused on social theory's role in the intersection between QA and AI. One work highlights
the importance of considering sociocultural aspects when applying machine learning in qualitative
analysis (Edelman et al., 2020). Radford and Joseph (2020) emphasised the potential limits of AI
in QA and stressed that these limits can be countered by social theory.
A few studies also have posed problems related to the “transactional validity” of LLM-supported
qualitative data analysis. Gauthier et al. (2023) sought to conceptualise the relation between QA
and ML tools by exploring how computational techniques are integrated by researchers in practice.
Their work highlights the influence that these tools may exercise on the research process. This is
important because it helps us see that the use of AI tools is not a neutral process, and it affects
research and analysis. Consequently, Shen et al. (2023) highlight the capabilities of Large
Language Models (LLMs) in analysing textual data. However, the authors also raise concerns
regarding validity, privacy, and ethics. The paper emphasizes the need for researchers to validate
the use of LLMs. The authors suggest the development of norms for using LLMs in social research.
For example, in previous research on using LLMs for QC several authors have measured how well
an LLM performs by assessing the inter-reliability with human coders using a metric know as
Cohen’s K (Gao et al., 2023; Xiao et al., 2023; Schiavone et al., 2023). This is an important metric
to assess how well an LLM performs QC, but it has limits in its application. Inter-coder reliability
can be applied largely to deductive coding, or in situations where we know with precision that the
coders have seen the same material in the same order. Its application is not suitable for inductive
coding, when large texts (e.g. interviews) are analysed.
In summary, the integration of ML and LLMs with QA has introduced new possibilities for
research methodologies, but it also raises many issues and questions. This paper contributes to the
debate about shaping ways to measure the validity of LLMs use in QA.


Proposed Methodology
While there is an initial body of work on using LLMs for QA, we still are in a phase where we
need to better assess if what we can perform with LLMs is 'good enough’. As we proposed in the
introduction, exploring if some form of ITS is reached in Phase 2 of a TA performed by LLMs
might constitute a useful step to assess or even just define the ‘transactional validity’ of the
analysis. To verify this working hypothesis the research design we propose is as follows.
                                                 5
In our previous work (see De Paoli, 2023a) we performed phases 2 to 5 of a TA using two existing
datasets of open access interviews. We have shown that an LLM (GPT3.5-Turbo) could produce
most themes that human researchers (who originally collected and analysed the datasets) have
themselves produced. Whilst there is not a perfect match, most of the LLM themes were deemed
‘good enough’ and quite similar to the one produced by the human researchers. Afterall, two
human researchers independently performing a TA on a dataset of interviews may not come up
with exactly the same themes anyway – some themes will overlap, and others will be different.
For this paper we propose to reuse one of these two datasets and an additional dataset of interviews
to assess ITS. We will reuse the dataset related to ‘teaching data sciences at UCSB’ (Curty et al.,
2023), which is composed of 10 interviews with university teachers/instructors of data science in
a university in California. This dataset is relatively small and might not lead to significant
saturation as previous research has shown that human researchers reach saturation at around 16
interviews. A second dataset that will be used is what we call the ‘scrum’ dataset composed of 39
interviews (Alami, 2022). This is a dataset of interviews with engineers using scrum and agile in
software development. This is significantly larger than the ‘teaching’ dataset and should better
allow to observe if there is any form of saturation.
In the work proposed in the De Paoli (2023a, further tested, refined and demonstrated in De Paoli,
2023b) the initial coding was performed as follows:
   1. The model would identify – using a properly engineered and tested prompt – a pre-defined
      set of codes (up to a pre-defined number, which was established in order to avoid reaching
      the max tokens error of the LLM) from each interview. In De Paoli, 2023a we used chunks
      of interviews (i.e. breaking down each interview in smaller parts, or chunks) and asked the
      model (with an appropriate prompt) to generate up to 3-4 codes, due to the tokens limit of
      the model GPT3.5-Turbo (4097 tokens) that was used.
   2. This would lead to a cumulative total codebook containing all the codes generated
      independently by the LLM for each interview chunk. This cumulative codebook, as such,
      contains repeated codes (since the model sees/codes each interview chunk separately).
   3. A posteriori, we asked the model (again with an appropriate prompt) to operate a codebook
      reduction for similar/repeated codes and find therefore the unique codes codebook.
   4. This would lead to a final codebook of unique codes, which could then be used to
      perform phase 3 and phase 4 of TA.
This previous workflow is briefly presented in simplified form in Figure 1.




                                                 6
                    Figure 1 – General workflow for initial coding with LLMs


The process we propose to measure ITS instead will perform the check for duplicates/repeated
codes after each interview rather than after all interviews have been coded by the LLM. This should
allow us to identify the unique codes generated after each interview and consequently give as a
precise count of the cumulative number of unique codes we can use to assess ITS. The idea is that
when checking duplicates for later interviews there should be some form of ITS, that is codes will
start to repeat and fewer new or unique codes will emerge. This design is as follows:
   1. The model identifies a pre-defined set/number of codes from the first interview.
   2. The model identifies a pre-defined set/number of codes from the second interview.
   3. The codes from 1 and 2 are joined (cumulative total codebook) and we ask the model to
      identify duplicates/unique of the codes of interview two that are in the codes of interview
      one. If a duplicate is found, then the code already in the codebook is kept and the
      duplicate is discarded.
   4. The unique codes from interview two are added to the codes of interview one into the
      cumulative unique codebook.
   5. The model identifies a pre-defined set/number of codes from the third interview.
   6. The model checks if the codes of interview 3 are repeated/unique in relation to the unique
      codebook. Unique codes are added to the unique codebook.
   7. Steps 5 and 6 a are repeated for all the remaining interviews.
   8. We will have at the end two lists of numbers: the total cumulative codes after each
      interview and the unique codes after each interview which we can use to assess what ITS
      could look like.
Note that for the first two interviews we need to bootstrap the unique cumulative codebook. That
is the codes of the first interview are already unique. It is only after we analyse the second that we


                                                  7
can add new unique codes. From the interview three, the process is then repeated. The workflow
is presented in a simplified form in Figure 2.




                       Figure 2 – Modified workflow to assessing LLMs ITS


Some additional changes compared to the previous methodology need to be further acknowledged.
In De Paoli (2023a and 2023b) we worked with GPT3.5-Turbo using the OpenAI API via python
scripts. GPT3.5-Turbo is limited to 4097 tokens per prompt. As we discussed there, because of
this we had to divide the interviews in smaller chunks for processing and limit the number of codes
generated, otherwise the model would reach the error ‘max number of tokens’, especially when
performing the Phase 3 of TA (the generation of the Themes). Since then, a larger GPT3.5 model
has been released which allows the processing of 16 thousand tokens (GPT3.5-Turbo-16k). This
allows potentially better processing of the data (i.e., interviews in their entirety) and the generation
of more codes per interview. This model is also relatively cheap to run compared to the newer
GPT4-Turbo for example and would be suitable for an analysis even with a limited budget.
Moreover, as we are not performing phase 3 of TA for this study, we do not need to avoid the ‘max
tokens error’ happening later in the analysis. We used GPT3.5-Turbo-16k again via the OpenAI
API and python. With this approach, we can programmatically pass our data (e.g. the interview
texts) directly into the prompt and use python for further data manipulation or storing (e.g. in csv
files).



                                                   8
Thus, for performing this experiment on assessing ITS we will process the interviews in their
entirety (and not in chunks) and we will request the model to produce up to 15 codes for each
interview for both datasets1.
The experiment described in Figure 2 requires two prompts, which are passed to the model via a
‘get-completion’ function (please see De Paoli, 2023a for a presentation of this function), always
using Temperature at 0. The first one is for the generation of the initial codes from each interview
and is as follows:


    PROMPT 1
    prompt = f"""
    Identify the 15 most relevant themes in the text, provide a
    meaningful name for each theme in no more than 6 words, 12 words
    simple description of the theme, and a max 30 words quote from the
    participant.
    Format the response as a json file keeping names, descriptions and
    quotes together in the json, and keep them together in 'Themes'.
     ```{text}```
     """


This is the same prompt used in previous work (except for the increased number of codes). We
should remind the readers that we use the word ‘theme’ in the prompt as for now it seems to work
better than using ‘codes’ or other terms, in this kind of prompts, but for clarity this prompt
generates initial codes from one interview (which is passed to the model in the {text} variable).
After each set of codes is created (i.e. after each interview) then a codebook reduction should be
performed. Note that it is possible (to reduce the risk of incurring in the model timeout) to save
each set of codes in separate csv files and then perform the second prompt reusing the codes from
the files. For the creation of the unique cumulative codebook, we used the following prompt, which
needs to run in a ‘for’ loop, as follows:


    PROMPT 2
    #iterates over the list of codes for one interview from prompt 1
    for t in range(nr_of_codes_in_list):


1
    Note that since the counting starts from 0, requesting up to 15 means the model can generate up to 16 codes

                                                            9
         value=codes[t] #individual code t from the list of codes
         prompt = f"""
         Then, determine if value: ```{value}``` conveys the same idea
         or meaning to any element in the list cumulative_u:
         {", ".join(cumulative_u)}.
         Your response should be either a string 'true' (Same idea or
         meaning) or a string 'false' (no similarity)


         Format the response as a json file using the key
         value_in_cumulative_u
         """




All the codes generated from Prompt_1 for one interview (or loaded from a csv file) are included
in a list ‘codes’ in the following format: ‘code - description’. Each code ({value} in the prompt),
is checked against the existing codebook {", ".join(cumulative_u)}. cumulative_u is in fact the
unique codebook. If the code ({value}) is present in the unique codebook - when even if the text
may differ but it conveys pretty much the same meaning - the model will return the string ‘true’.
If the model returns ‘true’ then it means the code already is in the codebook, otherwise the model
will return the string ‘false’ signaling that the code is unique. After having processed all the codes,
then the unique codes will be added to the cumulative_u list (the codebook of unique codes), which
will then be used in the subsequent iteration (i.e. when assessing if any of the codes generated by
the LLM for the next interview convey the same meaning). In this way the unique codebook will
be updated after each iteration. The Prompt_2 is very similar to the one proposed in previous
research (De Paoli, 2023a, 2023b) for reducing the codebook a posteriori, the main difference is
that the response is in this case a Boolean string rather than a reduced codebook per se. This prompt
is engineered in this way to make it easier to count unique codes (it is simply a matter of counting
the number of ‘false’), and also retrieve unique codes from the JSON generated with prompt one
(or from a csv file if the JSON was stored there) to then be included in the unique codebook.
In summary, with these two prompts it is possible to obtain the following elements, both essential
for assessing ITS:
   1. From Prompt_1 only: A precise number of the total cumulative codes and the total
      cumulative codebook.


                                                  10
   2. From Prompt_1+Prompt_2: A precise number of the codes which do not convey the same
      meaning for each interview in a dataset (i.e., the unique codes generated by the model for
      each interview).


Results
The previous workflow and prompts were used to process the ‘teaching’ and ‘scrum’ datasets we
briefly introduced earlier. We will start with the former which is composed of a smaller number
of observations (n=10 interviews). The total number of codes generated with prompt 1 is 135. As
we know, since the model sees each interview one at a time with no memory of the previous
interview analysis and codes, the codes can be repeated. After operating prompt 2 (after each
interview analysis/initial coding) the codebook results in 53 unique initial codes.


 Workflow                                                              Number of codes
 Cumulative codes total – prompt 1 only                                    135
 Cumulative unique codes – prompt 1 + prompt 2                              53
Table 1- Total and unique codebooks, ‘teaching’ dataset


To better understand the relationship between these codebooks we can plot the observations. First,
we can look at the cumulative total codes in Figure 3.




                Figure 3 – Total cumulative codes scatterplot, ‘teaching’ dataset.


There is clearly a linear relationship as it should be expected since Prompt_1 asks to generate up
to a fixed number of codes (note that for interview 4 the model generated a smaller number of
codes: LLM outputs are probabilistic and even if we fix the number of codes the model may
                                               11
produce more or fewer). We can now plot the cumulative unique codes, as per Figure 4. We can
see again a linear relation. This is perhaps less expected as one might expect this curve to look
more like a ‘decreasing growth curve’, flattening as more interviews are coded, reflecting code
saturation. Later a potential explanation for this will be offered.




                Figure 4 – Cumulative Unique codes scatterplot, ‘teaching’ dataset


To appreciate that there is saturation in place, we can look at both observations in the same set of
axes (Figure 5). The graph in Figure 5 also renders the observations continuous by connecting the
observations in the plot (but just for facilitating the interpretation, since the values are discrete). It
is certainly possible also to derive a regression curve, if this was relevant. Let’s first interpret the
graph in Figure 5 descriptively.
The first observation is that the unique cumulative codebook grows much slower than the total
codebook. A second observation is that perhaps the linear progress of the reduced codebook may
be dependent on the relatively low number of interviews. Although the debate about how many
interviews are needed to reach saturation is still open (which would relate to saturation as a
sampling approach). Studies we mentioned in the introduction would place this figure at 12-13
(e.g. Hennik and Kaiser, 2022) or 16 (Hagman et al. 2017).




                                                   12
            Figure 5 – Total and Unique codes comparison for the ‘teaching’ dataset


To evaluate the problem of whether the number of interviews have some impact on the assessment
of saturation, would require producing the previous analysis with a much larger dataset. The
‘scrum’ dataset we propose to use is composed of 39 interviews, thus greatly exceeding the number
of interviews suggested by the previous cited research and is also above one of the generic (almost
word-of-mouth/hearsay) sample size figures that we hear about for qualitative research (e.g. n=20).
For the ‘scrum’ dataset using Prompt_1 and Prompt_2 we have obtained the number of codes in
Table 2.


 Workflow                                                             Number of codes
 Cumulative codes total – Prompt_1 only                                   534
 Cumulative unique codes – Prompt_1 + Prompt_2                             66
Table 1- Total and unique codebooks, ‘scrum’ dataset


If we produce a scatter plot of the unique codes (Figure 6), we can observe in some part of the
graph some potential form of saturation (with the curve flattening). However, intuitively, it looks
like there still is some form of linear growth between the number of interviews and the unique
codebook. The increased number of interviews thus does not seem to lead to potential saturation
in the form of decreasing growth, even if this number greatly exceeds previous estimates of number
required for saturation (e.g. 16).




                                                13
                Figure 6 – Cumulative Unique codes scatterplot, ‘scrum dataset’


We can plot both cumulative codebooks in the same set of axes to derive some further descriptive
observations as seen in Figure 7. Again, we see in both cases the linear relations and that the
cumulative total growth is much faster than the unique codebook.




             Figure 7 – Total and Unique codes comparison for the ‘scrum’ dataset




                                              14
Proposition for considering ITS
The linear progression of the unique codebook may be explained by the fact that the model sees
each interview independently and even if the unique codebook we use to compare to each interview
grows, the probability that a new code may emerge from the next interview is always greater than
zero (p>0), due to this independence but also due to the potential size of the ‘codespace’ (i.e. the
number of all potential valid codes). Whilst this is an interesting problem, we will defer
considering it briefly in a later section of the paper. We instead concentrate now on proposing that
even with a linear growth of unique codes there is still a form of saturation.
The suggestion would be to look at the differences between the observations. For example, if we
look at the two lines of Figures 5 and 7 (Total/Unique), we can see how the codebook of cumulative
total codes and the unique codebook increasingly diverge as the number of interviews coded
increases. To an extent this divergence may signal some form of saturation. One could say that the
slope of the unique codebook line is much slower than the slope of the cumulative total, and that
this could amount to an inductive thematic saturation.
We could compute for each interview/observation the ratio between the number of cumulative
unique codes and the number of cumulative total codes. With this we would get a measure of the
rate of change between the two curves. For the ‘scrum’ dataset it will look like Figure 8, and
intuitively for interview 1 there is no rate of change since at beginning the cumulative and reduced
codebook are the same (and the ratio between the two is 1, e.g. 11 codes in both cases), however
as the two curves diverge more and more the cumulative rate of change decreases (with just one
exception) almost tending to a value approximatively around 0.1. This we argue is a form of
saturation, it is indeed the potential equivalent of ITS for LLMs QC.




                              Figure 8 – ITS for the ‘scrum’ dataset

                                                15
From this graph one may also obtain a generic indication of the number of interviews required for
the slope to start to flatten. Descriptively, already around interview 10 the slope is much slower
than previous interviews. At interview 20 the slope almost flattens with relatively low change.
We can do the same for the ‘teaching’ dataset (Figure 9) which has fewer interviews. This graph
suggests saturation is starting to show, but the curve tends toward 0.4 for later interviews. That is,
the steady-state ratio of the slopes is higher in this case.




                             Figure 9 – ITS for the ‘teaching’ dataset


We infer from the shape of these curves that, even at the same 10 interview point, the scrum dataset
delivers better ITS than the teacher dataset when analysed by the LLM. Therefore, we need to
consider that ITS for an LLM depends also on the underlying dataset (for example if each interview
in a set is more structured, the content more homogeneous, and so on). The metric consequently
can also tell us something about the underlying data and may for example be useful when analysing
from diverse datasets, even those collected by other researchers (e.g. Open Data taken from
repositories such as zenodo).


Relation of slopes
We would suggest that computing the relationship between the two sets of observations -- i.e.
the two codebooks (Unique/Total) -- might provide us with a synthetic indicator of how well the
LLM saturates the codes, producing ITS, and also an indicator telling us something about the
characteristics of the dataset itself. To help quantify this, we can use the rise over-run formula for
the slope relation in the following conceptual model.
Intuitively, if Prompt_2 produces no codebook reduction at all (that is, each set of interview codes
is completely different and unique form one another, for example if all the interviews came from

                                                 16
entirely different research, conducted in different contexts, with different questions, by different
researchers, etc.) then the slopes of Total and Unique will be the same, or almost the same.
Conversely, we can imagine a codebook reduction process with slope at almost zero, as if we are
analysing the same interview multiple times, over and over, with Temperature of the LLM at zero
and obtaining always the same set of codes for each with prompt 1. In this case, there are not
unique codes across the whole dataset. These are of course two extremes which should not happen
in reality. But using this observation we can conclude that the relation between the slopes
(assuming the linearity of the unique codebook) is a number between 0 and 1.
Therefore, the ratio between the slopes is a number between 0 and 1, the closer the ratio is to 1 the
less ITS we have and vice versa, as follows:


                                     0 < 𝐼𝑇𝑆 (𝑆𝑙𝑜𝑝𝑒 𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜) < 1



This ratio can be calculated as follows, using rise and run:


                                                       𝑈𝑛𝑖𝑞𝑢𝑒𝐶𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑠
                                 𝐼𝑇𝑆 (𝑆𝑙𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜) =
                                                        𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙𝐶𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑠


In the case of the scrum dataset this is as follows:


                                                        66
                                  𝐼𝑇𝑆(𝑆𝑙𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜) =         = 0.12
                                                        534


In the case of the ‘teaching’ codebooks this is as follows:


                                                       53
                                   𝐼𝑇𝑆(𝑆𝑙𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜) =       = 0.39
                                                       135


One might conclude that ITS is potentially present in both datasets, but clearly it is much higher
and more significative for the ‘scrum’ dataset. This might depend on the underlying data (not just
the number of interviews, but also how well they are structured), and not on how the model
performs with the QC.


Issue of the probability
                                                  17
As discussed earlier, when describing the graphs, we observed there is a probability that unique
codes are still generated after each interview even after several interviews in a potentially large
sample. In fact, the unique codebook seems to progress as a linear relation with the number of
interviews (at least in the two datasets we used). This is possibly dependent on the fact that each
interview is analysed independently by the LLM, so each code for a new interview is an
independent observation. It may also be possible that we observe a linear relation with the limited
number of observations (interviews) we have, but that with a much larger number of observations
(more interviews) the curve could show a decreasing growth. Let’s use some statistical thinking
and also the ‘scrum’ dataset to offer a simplified interpretation for this general problem. We will
propose our interpretation of the probability problem as a thought experiment, more than as a fully
worked solution, to assess the issue of the probability that at least unique code is generated when
we analyse a new interview.
Let’s imagine we add a new interview to the ‘scrum’ dataset called ‘interview N+1’ and we have
a human analyst generate 15 codes for this interview, without knowledge of the existing unique
codebook. We can ask what is the probability that at least one of these 15 codes of interview N+1
will be unique. We can calculate the Probability that at least one code from interview N+1 is
unique as follows:


                           𝑃(𝐴𝑡𝐿𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑡𝑂𝑛𝑒𝑈𝑛𝑖𝑞𝑢𝑒) = 1 − 𝑃(𝑁𝑜𝑡𝑈𝑛𝑖𝑞𝑢𝑒)



Earlier we noted that the ‘scrum’ codebook has 66 unique codes. Therefore, the problem becomes
that of calculating the P(NotUnique) for the additional interview, considering the existing 66
unique codes and the 15 newly generated codes by our analyst.
The ‘uniqueness’ of the codes clearly depends on the space of all possible codes. This number is,
however, not known. We could imagine that there is potentially a large space of valid unique codes
for a dataset. By no means infinite, but potentially in the order of hundreds. If we are modelling
the problem like a dependent probability problem – like a bag of marbles all of different colours
that we are drawing out without replacing - the probabilities of each draw are different. But, if the
number of marbles is large, then the probabilities do not change all that much and might not even
look like they change at all for small numbers. The graphs in Figure 10 set up a probability space
of sequential numbers, then draws 15 at random. Those 15 are added to ‘total’ and if they are not
already in ‘uniques’, added to it.




                                                 18
Figure 10 – Iterations in different code spaces


When the number of iterations is scaled closer to the size of the code space (e.g., 10 iterations in
100 code space or 100 iterations in 1000 code space), we see the decayed separation between total
and unique we had hypothesised. But, when the size of the code space is much bigger than the
number of iterations (e.g., 10 iterations in 1000 space), this is not appreciable, and they both look
roughly linear (see middle graph in Figure 10). Therefore, we suppose that we are simply seeing
two linear functions (in the case of unique codes for the ‘teaching’ and the ‘scrum’ datasets)
because they present a relatively few iterations (i.e. interviews) in potentially large probability
space (e.g. 39 iterations/interviews in a space of hundreds (or many more) valid unique codes).
From our previous probability equation, we could then model the probability function around this
space as follows:


                                                  𝑈𝑛𝑖𝑞𝑢𝑒𝐶𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑠 𝐶𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑠𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑁+1
                  𝑃(𝐴𝑡𝐿𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑡𝑂𝑛𝑒𝑈𝑛𝑖𝑞𝑢𝑒) = 1 − (                )
                                                     𝑆𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑒




                                                  19
In the example we are proposing the UniqueCodes are 66 and the exponential (the codes for the
additional interview) is 15. CodesSpace is the variable of the function, as shown in Figure 11.




Figure 11 – Probability and CodeSpace


In fact, this function shows that the P(AtLeastOneUnique) (with Nr.CodesN+1=15) is always
greater than zero, even with a relatively small CodeSpace and this P is 1 at around a CodeSpace
of 90. We can interpret this as follows: the probability that a new code is generated for a N+1
interview is always greater than zero and potentially very high (approaching 1). This therefore
explains potentially why we see a linear relation when building the unique codebook.




Cosine similarity of the codes
As a last test to check that the reduction of the codebook from the total cumulative to the unique
cumulative is meaningful, we compute cosine similarity (using the 66 codes from the ‘scrum’
analysis) with the sentence transformer all-mpnet-base-v2 (https://www.sbert.net/ - see Reimers
and Gurevych, 2019). This is done to ensure that no duplicated unique codes were included in the
codebook by the LLM due to e.g. potential hallucination. The figure shows that the unique codes
are indeed unique. Cosine similarity value of 1 is present only in the diagonal (when similarity of
a code is checked with itself, in dark red). No other cosine similarity shows the maximum value
of one (no other dark red cells except in the diagonal, even though some cells show some degree
of similarity with the diagonal).




                                                20
Figure 12 – Cosine similarity for the ‘scrum’ unique codes


Whilst this does not provide an indication of saturation per se, it shows that potentially no error or
significant hallucination occurred in building the unique codebook and we can be further confident
that the numerical metrics presented before can be valid.




Discussion
The problem of this paper was to establish whether an initial coding of semi-structured interviews
(phase 2 of a Thematic Analysis) performed inductively with an LLM brings about some
saturation. We concentrated on the analytical properties of saturation, defined by Saunders et al.
(2018) as inductive thematic saturation (ITS), which relates to how codes saturatenumerically. We
postulated that ITS could be a potential approach to evaluate the ‘transactional validity’ of a TA
performed with LLMs, that is a metric for assessing if the TA produced is of good quality. Our

                                                 21
work also aligns with the postulation by Shen et al. (2023) about the need to imagine ways to
validate and benchmark the use of LLMs for TA. Our proposed ITS metric could be one
component to use for validation and benchmarking the LLM TA.
This paper has offered directions to investigate LLMs ITS (in this case GPT3.5-Turbo-16k). This
will not be the final set of observations on this approach, but this manuscript offers some initial
working hypotheses and empirical evidence. From the two datasets used in this work it appears
that the codebook of unique codes generated by LLMs progresses largely as a linear relationship
with the interviews, rather than showing a decreasing growth. Even though we postulated that with
a potentially large dataset, in a relatively small code space, this may show decreasing growth.
However, practically in qualitative research the number of observations (i.e. interviews) will
always be a relatively small number. Nonetheless, we can still measure ITS by relating the slopes
of the unique cumulative codebook and the total cumulative codebook (which is known to progress
as linear relation when we request the model to generate up to n codes).
We observed that this ratio of the slopes (derived with rise and run, or more simply with the ratio
of the total and unique codebooks) is a number between 0 and 1, and when the ratio starts to move
away from the value of 1, we can start to appreciate that some form of ITS is reached. It is
important to note that the analytical (ITS) and data sampling saturations proposed by Saunders et
al. (2018) are two faces of the same coin. If LLMs do not reach ITS this may also be strongly
dependent on the dataset being analysed and not just on the model capacity to saturate the codes.
Moreover, the ITS metric we proposed also tells us something about the underlying dataset and
not just about the LLM ITS. One can imagine that semi-structured interviews which present some
degree of heterogeneity (even when coming from the same research) will lead to a lower ITS than
semi-structured interviews where the structured component of the interviewing is rather solid, thus
leading to a more compact unique codebook. For example, the ‘scrum’ dataset shows better ITS
than the ‘teaching’ dataset even after an equivalent number of interviews is considered (i.e. 10).
Overall, the final message of this manuscript is that assessing whether the ITS ratio metric
proposed in this work is a good instrument for transactional validity (Cho and Trent, 2006) will
depend on further testing and verification. However, what is proposed here could be a first step in
that direction.


Implications and future work
It is certainly up to the research community to evaluate whether the ITS metric proposed here
delivered ‘transactional validity’ and if it can constitute a valid metric. Further testing will be
required, for example with additional datasets, and possibly even with a much larger dataset than
the ‘scrum’ dataset we used. The metric may be confirmed or disproved, but nonetheless it
provides, as it is, a working hypothesis.
We are also aware that there may be an effect on saturation related to the order in which interviews
are coded and consequently the order in which the codebook is reduced. This effect, in fact, has
been already noted when the analysis is performed by humans. For example, Costantinou et al.

                                                22
(2017) showed that changing the order in which interviews are analysed changes the point (the
interview) at which saturation is reached. It will be important in future work therefore to check
this effect, and possibly replicate the study by Costantinou et al. (2017) with the support of an
LLM.
The approximated metric validity is also dependent on the performance in producing the unique
codebook with an entirely a posteriori approach or with performing this after each interview. It
will be important as part of future work to assess the differences between these two processes. The
consideration is, however, practical more than scientific. There is a lower cost in terms of tokens
processing with the a posteriori reduction, and there is less risk that the LLM produces a time-out
error. Arguably with cheaper LLMs or Open-Source models (which nonetheless require
computation), the cost aspect may become less important, and thus we can easily adopt the
approach that calculates precisely the ITS metric with either the slopes or the areas of the actual
lines.
Further metrics and approaches to assess the transactional validity of the LLMs QA may be
explored and adopted, including different ways to measure the coding saturation. What does seem
relevant is to take steps to imagine and test instruments for validity. This will allow the scientific
community to assess whether QA performed with LLMs is ‘good enough’


Conclusion
This paper investigated a metric for the transactional validity of LLMs QC. It proposed a metric
of analytical saturation of the codes, derived from empirical observations. Two datasets were used
to perform Qualitative Coding and then assess saturation. A saturation metric was proposed in the
form of the ration between the slopes of the Unique and Cumulative codebooks generated by the
LLM.


References
Alami, A. (2022). How Scrum Adds Value to Achieving Software Quality? [Data set]. Zenodo.
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6624064
Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2006). Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative research in
psychology, 3(2), 77-101.
Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2021). To saturate or not to saturate? Questioning data saturation as a
useful concept for thematic analysis and sample-size rationales. Qualitative research in sport,
exercise and health, 13(2), 201-216.
Burscher, B., Vliegenthart, R., & De Vreese, C. H. (2015). Using supervised machine learning to
code policy issues: Can classifiers generalize across contexts?. The ANNALS of the American
Academy of Political and Social Science, 659(1), 122-131.


                                                 23
Charmaz, K. (2014). Constructing grounded theory. London: Sage.
Chen, N. C., Drouhard, M., Kocielnik, R., Suh, J., & Aragon, C. R. (2018). Using machine
learning to support qualitative coding in social science: Shifting the focus to ambiguity. ACM
Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems (TiiS), 8(2), 1-20.
Chew, R., Bollenbacher, J., Wenger, M., Speer, J., & Kim, A. (2023). LLM-Assisted Content
Analysis: Using Large Language Models to Support Deductive Coding. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2306.14924.
Cho, J., & Trent, A. (2006). Validity in qualitative research revisited. Qualitative research, 6(3),
319-340.
Christou, P. A. (2023). Ηow to Use Artificial Intelligence (AI) as a Resource, Methodological
and Analysis Tool in Qualitative Research?. The Qualitative Report, 28(7), 1968-1980.
Constantinou, C. S., Georgiou, M., & Perdikogianni, M. (2017). A comparative method for
themes saturation (CoMeTS) in qualitative interviews. Qualitative research, 17(5), 571-588.
Curty, R. G., Greer, R., & White, T. (2023). Teaching undergraduates with quantitative data in
the social sciences at University of California Santa Barbara [Data set]. Zenodo.
https://doi.org/10.25349/D9402J
De Paoli, S. (2023). Performing an Inductive Thematic Analysis of Semi-Structured Interviews
With a Large Language Model: An Exploration and Provocation on the Limits of the Approach.
Social Science Computer Review, 08944393231220483.
De Paoli, S. (2023). Writing user personas with Large Language Models: Testing phase 6 of a
Thematic Analysis of semi-structured interviews. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.18099
Drápal, J., Westermann, H., & Savelka, J. (2023). Using Large Language Models to Support
Thematic Analysis in Empirical Legal Studies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.18729.
Edelmann, A., Wolff, T., Montagne, D., & Bail, C. A. (2020). Computational social science and
sociology. Annual Review of Sociology, 46, 61-81.
Evans, M. S. (2014). A computational approach to qualitative analysis in large textual datasets.
PloS one, 9(2), e87908.
Franzosi, R., Dong, W., & Dong, Y. (2022). Qualitative and quantitative research in the
humanities and social sciences: how natural language processing (NLP) can help. Quality &
Quantity, 1-31.
Gao, J., Choo, K. T. W., Cao, J., Lee, R. K. W., & Perrault, S. (2023). CoAIcoder: Examining
the Effectiveness of AI-assisted Human-to-Human Collaboration in Qualitative Analysis. ACM
Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction. Published August 2023,
https://doi.org/10.1145/3617362



                                                 24
Gao, J., Guo, Y., Lim, G., Zhan, T., Zhang, Z., Li, T. J. J., & Perrault, S. T. (2023). CollabCoder:
A GPT-Powered Workflow for Collaborative Qualitative Analysis. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2304.07366.
Gauthier, R. P., Pelletier, C., Carrier, L. A., Dionne, M., Dubé, È., Meyer, S., & Wallace, J. R.
(2023). Agency and Amplification: A Comparison of Manual and Computational Thematic
Analyses by Public Health Researchers. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer
Interaction, 7, 1-22.
Glinka, K., & Müller-Birn, C. (2023). Critical-Reflective Human-AI Collaboration: Exploring
Computational Tools for Art Historical Image Retrieval. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.12843.
Guest, G., Namey, E., & Chen, M. (2020). A simple method to assess and report thematic
saturation in qualitative research. PloS one, 15(5), e0232076.
Hagaman, A. K., & Wutich, A. (2017). How many interviews are enough to identify metathemes
in multisited and cross-cultural research? Another perspective on Guest, Bunce, and Johnson’s
(2006) landmark study. Field methods, 29(1), 23-41.
Hennink, M., & Kaiser, B. N. (2022). Sample sizes for saturation in qualitative research: A
systematic review of empirical tests. Social science & medicine, 292, 114523.
Jacobs, T., & Tschötschel, R. (2019). Topic models meet discourse analysis: a quantitative tool
for a qualitative approach. International Journal of Social Research Methodology, 22(5), 469-
485.
Longo, L. (2019, September). Empowering qualitative research methods in education with
artificial intelligence. In World Conference on Qualitative Research (pp. 1-21). Cham: Springer
International Publishing.
Mason, W., Vaughan, J. W., & Wallach, H. (2014). Computational social science and social
computing. Machine Learning, 95, 257-260.
Papakyriakopoulos, O., Watkins, E. A., Winecoff, A., Jaźwińska, K., & Chattopadhyay, T.
(2021). Qualitative Analysis for Human Centered AI. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.03784.
Radford, J., & Joseph, K. (2020). Theory in, theory out: the uses of social theory in machine
learning for social science. Frontiers in big Data, 3, 18.
Reimers N, Gurevych I (2019) Sentence-BERT: sentence embeddings using siamese BERT-
networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.10084. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/D19-1410
Rettberg, J. W. (2022). Algorithmic failure as a humanities methodology: Machine learning's
mispredictions identify rich cases for qualitative analysis. Big Data & Society, 9(2),
20539517221131290.
Rietz, T., & Maedche, A. (2021, May). Cody: An AI-based system to semi-automate coding for
qualitative research. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (pp. 1-14).

                                                25
Saunders, B., Sim, J., Kingstone, T., Baker, S., Waterfield, J., Bartlam, B., Burroughs, H. &
Jinks, C. (2018). Saturation in qualitative research: exploring its conceptualization and
operationalization. Quality & quantity, 52, 1893-1907. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11135-017-0574-
8
Schiavone, W., Roberts, C., Du, D., Sauro, J. and Lewis J. (2023). Can ChatGPT Replace UX
Researchers? An Empirical Analysis of Comment Classifications. Online post, available at:
https://measuringu.com/classification-agreement-between-ux-researchers-and-chatgpt/
Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. (1998). Basics of qualitative research techniques. London: Sage.
Xiao, Z., Yuan, X., Liao, Q. V., Abdelghani, R., & Oudeyer, P. Y. (2023, March). Supporting
Qualitative Analysis with Large Language Models: Combining Codebook with GPT-3 for
Deductive Coding. In Companion Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on
Intelligent User Interfaces (pp. 75-78).




                                               26
