                                              Scalable Qualitative Coding with LLMs: Chain-of-Thought
                                             Reasoning Matches Human Performance in Some Hermeneutic
                                                                        Tasks

                                                                                       Zackary Okun Dunivin
                                                                        Center for Complex Networks and Systems Research
                                                                   Luddy School of Informatics, Computer Science, and Engineering
                                                                                      Department of Sociology
                                                                                         Indiana University




arXiv:2401.15170v2 [cs.CL] 12 Feb 2024
                                                                                      Bloomington, Indiana, US
                                                                                         zdunivin@iu.edu




                                                                                             A BSTRACT
                                                  Qualitative coding, or content analysis, extracts meaning from text to discern quantitative patterns
                                                  across a corpus of texts. Recently, advances in the interpretive abilities of large language models
                                                  (LLMs) offer potential for automating the coding process (applying category labels to texts), thereby
                                                  enabling human researchers to concentrate on more creative research aspects, while delegating
                                                  these interpretive tasks to AI. Our case study comprises a set of socio-historical codes on dense,
                                                  paragraph-long passages representative of a humanistic study. We show that GPT-4 is capable of
                                                  human-equivalent interpretations, whereas GPT-3.5 is not. Compared to our human-derived gold
                                                  standard, GPT-4 delivers excellent intercoder reliability (Cohen’s κ ≥ 0.79) for 3 of 9 codes, and
                                                  substantial reliability (κ ≥ 0.6) for 8 of 9 codes. In contrast, GPT-3.5 greatly underperforms for
                                                  all codes (mean(κ) = 0.34; max(κ) = 0.55). Importantly, we find that coding fidelity improves
                                                  considerably when the LLM is prompted to give rationale justifying its coding decisions (chain-of-
                                                  thought reasoning). We present these and other findings along with a set of best practices for adapting
                                                  traditional codebooks for LLMs. Our results indicate that for certain codebooks, state-of-the-art
                                                  LLMs are already adept at large-scale content analysis. Furthermore, they suggest the next generation
                                                  of models will likely render AI coding a viable option for a majority of codebooks.

                                         1   Introduction

                                         Text categorization, commonly referred to as content analysis and qualitative coding in the social sciences, plays an
                                         important role in scholarly research and industrial applications. This process traditionally relies on human expertise
                                         to interpret the nuanced and often complex meanings embedded in texts [1, 2]. The difficulty lies in the multifaceted
                                         nature of meaning and the challenge of fitting real-world complexity into discrete categories, even for skilled readers.
                                         Historically, these challenges have positioned text categorization as a task unsuitable for machine learning approaches
                                         [3], despite robust attempts [4, 5].
                                         Recent developments in artificial intelligence, notably the advent of transformers with billions of parameters known as
                                         large language models (LLMs), have begun to challenge this notion. These models demonstrate increasing capabilities
                                         in knowledge, interpretation, reasoning, and creativity expressed in natural language, approaching or even surpassing
                                         human performance [6–8]. The processing speed of artificial intelligence opens up the possibility of categorizing
                                         vast quantities of text, far exceeding the limitations of human coding teams restricted to smaller samples. Yet, this
                                         opportunity raises a critical question: how can we ensure and maintain the accuracy of machine categorization at a level
                                         comparable to human standards?
                                         This study provides the strongest evidence to date that machines are capable of human-quality interpretations of text
                                         for the purposes of qualitative coding. Additionally, our report serves as a practical guide to employing LLMs in text
                                         categorization and as a reference for those encountering machine-assisted qualitative coding in empirical research. We
                                         contribute to the growing body of work that builds confidence in the rigor of LLM-based text categorization [9–12], a

                                         Code and data available at https://osf.io/k4fg9
Scalable Content Analysis with LLMs


field that will expand as these models continue to evolve. Our report emphasizes the redesign of codebooks—comprising
category descriptions and coding instructions—specifically for LLMs. We demonstrate how the structure of prompts,
the specific requests made to the generative model for categorizing passages, significantly impacts coding fidelity. Even
as these models continue to rapidly improve, we expect most of the principles of prompt design we report will remain
useful and informative as methodologists explore new models and empiricists automate their coding workflows. Our
results are presented through narratives detailing our approach and highlighting potential challenges and demonstrated
by LLM-generated analyses to a human-derived gold standard. A summary of best practices for content analysis with
an LLM is also presented in tabular format for quick reference.
Key findings of our study include:

       • GPT-4 exhibits human-equivalent performance with zero-shot prompts. 8 of 9 tasks exceed the 0.6 threshold
         for substantial agreement using Cohen’s κ. 3 of 9 tasks exceed the 0.75 threshold for excellent agreement.

       • GPT-3.5, when given the same prompts, has an average intercoder reliability of 0.34 across all codes.

       • Codebooks designed for human coders need reworking for LLM application, requiring iterative manual testing
         to refine phrasing and improve model comprehension.

       • Agreement improves when the LLM provides rationale for code assignments: µ(κ) = 0.68 vs. µ(κ) = 0.59.

       • Agreement improves when presenting each code as a separate prompt, rather than the codebook as a whole:
         µ(κ) = 0.68 vs. µ(κ) = 0.60.


1.1   Automating Content Analysis: Past and Present

Prior work on automating content analysis entailed training machine learning models on large quantities of text.
Supervised models, typically some form of linear regression, learn to associate text features with user-specified
categories [13]. This process captures half the traditional human-coded process by using human-derived codes and
examples, but fails to leverage abstract code descriptions found in a codebook, as well as requiring large quantities
of human-annotated data. Unsupervised models, such as LDA [14, 15] or BERTTopic [16], develop their own
categorizations from unlabeled training sets. This process does not require time-intensive labeling, but rarely captures
the specific categories that a researcher intends to target.
The latest generation of LLMs (e.g, GPT [17], LLaMa [18], Mistral [19], Claude [20]) differ notably from previous
machine learning models in that they can perform new tasks specified through natural language prompts. A user can
specify a task that the model was not trained on, give few (single digit) or no examples, and the model will return output
conforming to the specifications. Demonstrated successes include computer code generation [21], creative writing [22],
and quantitative reasoning [23]. We are only beginning to understand and expand upon the limitations of these models.
By converting natural language requests into highly intelligent output across vast and indeterminate domains, LLMs
lower the technical barriers to machine learning by making its application more naturalistic and eliminating the need
for large training data. Beyond this, LLM’s capacities in many domains far exceed the specialized machine learning
models that preceded them, suggesting that for many applications, including scholarly inquiry, artificial intelligence is
overwhelmingly more accessible and capable in 2024 than it was just two years prior.
Early studies of content analysis with LLMs are encouraging. Xiao et al. [9] demonstrate moderate success, Cohen’s
κ = 0.61 and κ = 0.38, in two linguistic tasks using GPT-3. Chew et al. [10] report high success on many of 19 tasks
across three datasets, and results that are indistinguishable from random for others. It is difficult to evaluate their results
due to the choice of Gwet’s AC1, which is biased toward agreement on negative codings rather than positive, whereas
most standard measures of intercoder reliability do the opposite [24]. However, we commend Chew et al.’s approach to
adapting codebooks for LLMs, which is communicated with great detail and clarity. A survey of 20 empirical pieces
reports “mixed-results” of using GPT-3 to automate “text annotation,” a term that ties their framing to “data annotation”,
labeling data for in machine learning [25], rather than content analysis in the tradition of grounded theory [26].
We present here three advances to these studies. 1) We report the first methodological account of automating qualitative
coding using GPT-4, which, along with other recent models, greatly improves upon many of GPT-3’s capabilities
[19, 27, 28]. 2) We provide the first conclusive evidence that LLMs are capable of human-equivalent performance in
qualitative coding, and do so on larger passages of text, wherein meaning is often woven through multiple interrelated
clauses. 3) We demonstrate that GPT is better at interpreting text when it is tasked with justifying its coding decisions
(chain-of-thought prompting) rather than applying codes without an accompanying explanation.


                                                              2
Scalable Content Analysis with LLMs


1.2     Case Study: W.E.B. Du Bois’s Characterization in News Media

In order to present a realistic challenge of using an LLM to do qualitative coding, we make a case study of our own
work. We adapted a codebook written by the authors to understand how the scholar and activist W.E.B. Du Bois has
been characterized in news media over time. The codebook is composed of 9 codes in 3 categories. Due to multiple
layers of agency (who is doing what) and voice (who is saying what), the tasks are difficult even for human interpreters.
Applying the codes is also complicated because it can be difficult to differentiate Du Bois’s scholarship from his
political activism, as Du Bois’s theoretical contributions have profound implications for understanding race and the
social-historical position of Black persons in the United States and beyond, making them powerful activist tools. We
are particularly interested in understanding how different facets of Du Bois’s activities contributed to his canonization
in the public imagination as the preeminent figure for understanding Black political struggle. Table 1 gives the codes in
brief. Complete examples of the original human and modified-for-GPT codebook are included in the appendix.
The training and test data for our study were random samples of passages from New York Times articles (1970–2023)
that mention W.E.B. Du Bois. 232 passages were automatically extracted as concurrent paragraphs containing “Du
Bois”. The average number of words was 94 (σ = 70), and the average number of sentences was 3.75 (σ = 2.88). To
give a better sense of the size of our passages, this paragraph has 76 words across 4 sentences.

                                      Table 1: Categories and descriptions for 9 codes.
    Characterization of Du Bois

    Scholar                         Describes Du Bois as a scholar or intellectual.
    Activist                        Refers to Du Bois’s political or social activism.
    General Themes

    Monumental Memorialization      Refers to an enduring cultural object named after Du Bois.
    Mention of Scholarly Work       Mentions or quotes specific academic works by Du Bois.
    Social/Political Advocacy       Mentions or implies social or political activism, advocacy, or critique.
    Canonization Processes

    Coalition Building              Refers to Du Bois’s activities with activist or academic organizations.
    Out of the Mouth of Academics   Describes an academic organization engaging with Du Bois’s legacy.
    Out of the Mouth of Activists   Describes an activist organization engaging with Du Bois’s legacy.
    Collective Synecdoche           Mentions Du Bois alongside other figures in order to represent some facet of
                                    a culture, era, or ideology.




2      Results

2.1     Adapting a Codebook for an LLM

Initially, we developed a codebook for human coders using standard methods. This process involved exploratory reading
to define and refine codes. Codes were derived to probe particular substantive hypotheses, some of which preceded
our exploratory reading, and others which resulted from it. We then applied these codes iteratively, adjusting them
as needed until we achieved high intercoder reliability with a test set. We adapted these code descriptions for use
with a large language model, evaluating the LLM’s performance on a training set of text passages. Where we found
ambiguities or deficiencies in the model’s interpretation, we refined the code descriptions accordingly. This iterative
process of definition, evaluation, and refinement follows Nelson’s Computational Grounded Theory paradigm [4], the
core of which is common to all qualitative code development processes whether or not coding is automated [26].
Our experience modifying the code descriptions yielded several key insights related in the following paragraphs. We
encourage readers interested in a fuller account of this process to read Chew et al.’s study [10] describing their process
of LLM-Assisted Content Analysis (LACA), which relates a process similar to our own in greater detail.


                                                             3
Scalable Content Analysis with LLMs



Role            You are tasked with applying qualitative codes to articles, book reviews, and
Assignment      opinion pieces referencing W.E.B. Du Bois. The purpose of this task is to
                track how Du Bois is represented in news media over time.

                Below I will explain how to apply the code:

                Title: Monumental Memorialization
Code            Description: Apply when an enduring cultural object is named after Du Bois.
Definition      Such objects include prizes/awards, named professorships, buildings or rooms,
                geographical features, institutes, schools, or activist organizations. Do not
                apply when Du Bois is mentioned in the title of a book or theater production.

Justification   When you evaluate the passage, provide a justification of why you did or did
                not apply the code.

                Then list the code in the following fashion if you applied the code:

                Justification: [insert 2-3 sentence rationale for applying the code here]

                Codes Applied:
                - Scholar

Decision /      Otherwise you can format it like this:
Formatting
                Justification: [insert 2-3 sentence rationale for not applying the code here]

                Codes Applied:
                - None

                Do not write anything in your reply after listing the ``Codes Applied:''

                                     Figure 1: The chain-of-thought prompt sequence.



LLM-generated rationale are essential for evaluating performance. In adapting the codebook, we wanted to
understand not just which codes the model struggled to interpret correctly, but what aspects of the code the model
failed to capture. To achieve this, we structured our prompts to require GPT to justify its decision to apply or not apply
each code. These rationale were invaluable. They often highlighted parts of the code description that were ambiguous
or imprecisely defined, leading the model to misinterpret them. Whenever a rationale repeatedly pointed to such an
issue, we revised the corresponding code. We then retested the passage to check that the code was correctly applied
and the rationale aligned with our intended interpretation of the code. Sometimes a revision would not improve the
interpretations for the passages in question; other times it would fix the interpretations for those passages, but would
introduce new problems in passages which were previously coded correctly.
Figure 1 demonstrates an effective method of prompting GPT to provide rationale for its code selections. The initial
instruction is given by the Justification section of the prompt, and solicited again in the Decision/Formatting box.

LLMs require more precise descriptions than do human readers. Human coders do not rely solely on a written
codebook. Their interpretation of the codes is enriched through the codebook development process, discussions with
fellow coders, and supplementary oral instructions. An LLM lacks this interactive and historical context and must
interpret codes entirely from written descriptions. Our work modifying the codebook for GPT revealed information
that, while implicitly understood by the code developers, wasn’t explicitly stated in the code descriptions. This process
not only aided in refining the codebook for automated coding, but also improved our own understandings of the codes.
This ultimately led to clearer definition of the codes, thereby enhancing future manual coding processes as well. Figure
2 demonstrates how the Monumental Memorialization and Social/Political Advocacy codes were redefined to improve
GPT’s comprehension.
Often, we encountered cases where ambiguous phrasing was obvious to humans, but challenging for the LLM. Our
codebook contains two codes that relate to Du Bois’s reputation among academics and activists. These codes are meant
to evaluate whether Du Bois appears in a news story because either an academic or activist mentioned him. Initially, we
titled this code “Academic Repute,” which worked well for human coders. GPT, however, consistently misinterpretted


                                                            4
Scalable Content Analysis with LLMs


    Original: Activist
    Apply when Du Bois is developing activist organizations, giving public speech-
    es, participating in meetings with politicians and organizers, running for
    office, promoting a candidate, organization or initiative. Also apply when Du A
    Bois is explicitly described as an activist or leader.

   Redefined: Activist
 A Apply this code when Du Bois is explicitly called an "activist" or "leader",
   or when his political or social activism is either explicitly noted or clearly B
   implied through context. Examples include being mentioned in the context of
   leadership, activism, developing activist organizations, giving public speech-
   es, participating in meetings with politicians and organizers, running for
   office, or promoting a candidate, organization, or initiative.


   Original: Social/Political Activism C
 D Refers to any form of social or political participation in promoting change in
   society. Can be used in conjunction with Du Bois’ scholarly work, specifically E
   when Du Bois’s ideas are used to frame Black political struggle. Can be used
 F to describe Du Bois’ political work or those who invoke Du Bois in service of G
   their activism.

   Redefined: Social/Political Advocacy C
 D This code applies when a passage mentions or implies any form of social or po-
   litical activism, advocacy, critique, or discourse, including discussions about
   current or historical social problems. This includes not only direct activism F
   of Du Bois and others, but also the framing and challenging of social norms,
 E historical narratives, and racial or cultural identities. Apply this code when
   Du Bois's work, persona, or ideas are invoked in discussions that critically G
   engage with Black identity, positionality, or broader systemic circumstances
   of Black people. Adjacency to other activists, such as inclusion in a list, is H
   insufficient; advocacy must be explicitly mentioned in the passage.


Figure 2: Two examples of prompt redefinition. Colored, alphabetically labeled blocks of text show alterations derived through
          iterative code refinement. Italics draw attention to direction to constrain interpretive scope to implicit or explicit information.


this code as pertaining to Du Bois’s esteem as an academic, rather than among or by academics (the meaning of “among”
remains ambiguous even here). We tried numerous iterations this code without success. Nevertheless, altering the title
of the code to the far more literal “Out of the Mouth of Academics” dramatically improved performance, even when
paired with the original code description. In another case, the code titled “Social/Political Activism” was revised to
“Social/Political Advocacy” (Figure 2, C) because GPT did not consider social critique to be a form of activism, even
when it was specifically instructed to.
We found that words indicating how much the model should draw on context or its own outside knowledge had large
impacts on the model’s outputs, often to the desired effect. In particular, instructing the model to restrict itself to
“explicit” meanings, or to draw on “implicit” meanings, often helped the model with part of a code description it had
struggled with. Figure 2 B and D demonstrate the addition of such verbiage to control scope.
Both mandatory (do) and prohibitory (do not) phrasing were observed by the model, though mandatory phrasing seemed
more successful, a finding reported by other researchers [29]. The ordering of directives also impacted how likely the
model was to follow them. We found that moving a phrase that was ignored in the coding rationale toward the front of
the definition made the model more likely to follow its specifications, as in Figure 2 A. When a very specific problem
was observed repeatedly, it was sometimes necessary to add a directive to correct it, as in Figure 2 H.

Prompting for machine-readable output. To fully automate the coding process, model output must be reliably
readable by a computer. The LLM generates text, which must be interpreted by another script into a data structure, such
as a table, for further analysis. Instructing exactly how to format the output produced machine-readable results with


                                                                     5
Scalable Content Analysis with LLMs


GPT-4 and GPT-3.5. Critically, this involves specifying a tag that the interpreting script locates, after which follows
a reliably formatted list of codes. The Decision/Formatting component Figure 1 illustrates how to constrain model
output and produce consistent results across queries. Additionally, because GPT tends to be excessively verbose and
summarize its output, particularly at higher temperatures, we informed the model that we do not want any output to
follow the code list.

2.2   Selecting a Model and Writing Prompts for Optimal Performance

Once the code descriptions have been revised for LLM text categorization, numerous other decisions remain about
how to prompt a model to execute the content analysis. We present these as a separate step for the sake of clarity, but
in reality, we developed our approach in iteratively and tandem with revising the code descriptions. We hope future
methodologists and empiricists will benefit from what we learned during this process, and that less exploration of these
components will be necessary so practitioners can focus on application or exploration of calibrations not explored here.
We summarize all our recommendations for qualitative coding with an LLM in Table 3.
There is large and growing body of academic and nonacademic literature on prompt engineering: constructing user-
defined input to elicit the best model output. In fact, the codebook adaptation in the previous section was in large part an
exercise in prompt engineering. However, in this second section, prompt engineering refers more to the broader context
of task description than the code definitions. In this section we report how different prompts influence the quality of
machine categorization. Additionally we compare performance when the LLM is tasked with assigning each code
independently to when the model is given the full codebook and assigned with coding all 9 codes as a single task. We
refer to these as the “Per Code” and “Full Codebook” approach respectively.
Studies have shown that LLM decision-making improves when the model is prompted to account for its decisions
[30, 31]. This is generally known as chain-of-thought (CoT) prompting or reasoning, and refers to breaking down
tasks into specific components, one or more of which involve planning for future steps or reflection on previous ones.
Our prompts, which can be viewed in full in the appendix, apply chain-of-thought prompting by including 1) a role
assignment step, informing the machine of its purpose, 2) a task description step, specifying the code definition, 3) a
justification step, instructing the model to provide a rationale for its decision, and 4) a decision step, wherein the model
delivers its ultimate analysis in a consistent, machine-readable format. An example of the chain-of-thought prompt
sequence is given by Figure 1.
We use zero-shot prompts throughout this study. Zero-shot refers to providing the model only the task description,
without giving examples of correctly executed responses. Xiao et al. found few-shot prompting improves coding and
performance on other tasks [9], whereas Chew et al. largely employed zero-shot prompts [10]. Our case study involves
evaluating paragraph-long passages rather than single clauses. We found that information in the examples was drawn
upon by the LLM and interfered with its coding decisions. We also found that in Full Codebook prompts, giving
examples greatly expanded the prompt, negatively impacting results. We suggest that when content is more literary or
historical, zero-shot prompts are probably preferred, but that most coding tasks will benefit from few-shot prompting as
demonstrated by the results of many other studies across domains.
Performance comparisons are relative to the human-derived gold standard hidden from the LLM at all stages of
development. We used the default settings for the GPT API where temperature is set to 0 and nucleus sampling (top_p)
is set to 1. We specified the task description as a “system prompt”, and provide each passage as a “user prompt”. A
system prompt gives the LLM its purpose, clearly specifying the task it is meant to address, whereas a user prompt
provides the input to which the model responds by generating output. We did not investigate whether intercoder
agreement suffers with the default system prompt, while combining the task description and passage as a user prompt.

GPT-4 greatly outperforms GPT-3.5. We found that GPT-4 approaches human performance for 3 codes: Activist:
κ = 0.81; Monumental Memorialization: κ = 1.00; Collective Synecdoche κ = 0.79. GPT-4 prompted for rationale
provides considerably higher quality code assignments than GPT-3.5, except in the case of the Out of the Mouth of
Activists code, which no configuration handled well. It is especially notable that GPT-4 and GPT-3.5 differed in their
most accurately interpreted codes. In the 3 tasks GPT-4 executed best, GPT-3.5’s performance was slightly below its
own average, mean(κall ) = 0.34 vs. mean(κ) = 0.32.

Coding fidelty improves when codes are presented as individual tasks. We adapted our codebook by presenting
the entire codebook to GPT along with task instructions. However, we found in testing that performance improved when
GPT was given each task independently. This “per code” approach was taken by one recent study exploring content
analysis with non-mutually exclusive codes (permitting multiply coded passages) [10], but not another, which tested
only two codes [9]. Table 2 compares the GPT-4 performance when presented individual tasks for each code (“Per
Code”) and when presented all tasks in a single prompt (“Full Codebook”). We found that for the 3 human-equivalent


                                                             6
Scalable Content Analysis with LLMs



Table 2: Intercoder reliability (Cohen’s κ) for all codes on 111 gold standard passages. Best overall performance is shown in bold.
         Italics indicate the highest intercoder reliability between pairs with and without prompting for rationale (CoT vs. No CoT);
         if the pair are equivalent neither is italicized. Two values are considered equivalent if their difference does not exceed 0.02.
                                                                               GPT-4                              GPT-3.5

                                                              Per Code              Full Codebook                Per Code

                    Code                     Count        CoT          No CoT       CoT        No CoT         CoT        No CoT

     Scholar                                    27        0.61          0.52        0.59         0.42        0.29         0.21
     Activist                                   23        0.81          0.65        0.67         0.62        0.39         0.32
     Monumental Memorialization                 13        1.00          0.91        0.75         0.48        0.29         0.31
     Mention of Scholarly Work                  24        0.71          0.69        0.52         0.44        0.33         0.39
     Social/Political Advocacy                  51        0.64          0.60        0.60         0.60        0.55         0.51
     Coalition Building                          9        0.60          0.44        0.43         0.13        0.33         0.17
     Out of the Mouth of Academics              30        0.63          0.65        0.65         0.62        0.37         0.33
     Out of the Mouth of Activists              11        0.30          0.09        0.34         0.18        0.21         0.09
     Collective Synecdoche                      26        0.79          0.78        0.81         0.71        0.27         0.27

     Mean                                       24        0.68          0.59        0.60         0.46        0.34         0.29


tasks (Activist, Monumental Memorialization, and Collective Synecdoche) the Per Code performance far exceeded the
Full Codebook for 2 tasks, and was comparable for 1. For 2 other tasks, Mention of Scholarly Work and Coalition
Building, we found that the Per Code configuration produced considerably higher agreement, whereas Full Codebook
performed comparably to the Per Code in the remaining 4 tasks.

Coding fidelity improves when the model is prompted to justify its coding decisions. Consistent with other
experiments with chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning in LLMs, we found that coding agreement benefited strongly
from prompting the model to explain itself [32]. Table 2 shows the effect of prompting for rationale on three pairs
of conditions: Per Code GPT-4, Full Codebook GPT-4, and Per Code GPT-3.5. We found that across all codes
and conditions, with one exception, CoT prompting produces higher or equivalent intercoder reliability with the gold
standard. Using GPT-4, average Per Code agreement improved from 0.59 to 0.68, and average Full Codebook agreement
improved from 0.46 to 0.60. Furthermore, a majority of pairs showed substantial improvement when the codes were
assigned after providing reasoning for coding decisions.

3    Discussion
Determining appropriate domains for LLM-assisted qualitative coding. Previous methods of automated text
categorization, both supervised and unsupervised, rarely met the standards of traditional social scientists and humanists,
and were instead generally employed by data scientists. Capturing meaning, particularly complex meaning, through
machine learning has largely been an elusive goal [3]. Despite our own former skepticism, we predict that LLMs will be
capable of applying most qualitative codebooks within the year. However, our results show that even within the scope
of a single codebook, interpretation quality varies. Thus, different disciplines and domains should expect model success
and the ease of transitioning a codebook to vary considerably. We suspect that more humanistic and “softer” scientific
approaches will (continue to) be more resistant to machine interpretation than problems posed by scholars who identify
with “harder” sciences, to say nothing of their ability to convince their peers of its validity. We do not oppose developing
evaluation benchmarks for qualitative coding to assess which models are adept at what variety of task, but neither do we
advocate it; meaning is manifold and emergent, and much of its beauty derives from its resistance to reduction and
definition. Instead, we suggest those who wish to employ an LLM to perform content analysis survey similar attempts
and simply experiment on their own. The process of discovering triumphs, workarounds, and limitations of working
with these models was not only fascinating, but tremendously fun.

Practical aspects of transitioning to content analysis with LLMs. While artificial intelligence potentially opens
up much larger datasets to qualitative scholars, there is still a considerable technical barrier to automating content


                                                                   7
Scalable Content Analysis with LLMs



                                Table 3: Principles of prompting an LLM for qualitative coding.
    Task Instructions

    Prompt for Rationale    Model fidelity improves when instructed to justify its coding decisions.
    One Task Per Code       Model fidelity improves when given each code as a separate task.
    Brevity                 Shorter task descriptions are more likely to be faithfully executed by the model.
    Structured Output       Instruct the model to format its output to ensure uniform responses.
    Code Definitions

    Word Choice             A single high-content word can be changed to align with the LLM’s built-in ontology.
    Clause Order            Clauses are more likely to be observed when introduced earlier in the code description.
    Mandates/Prohibitions Both can be effective, but it is easier to get the model to “do” than “do not”.
    Code Titles             Altering the code title can have a large effect even without altering the definition.
    Interpretation Scope    Use words like “implicit” and “explicit” when interpretation is too limited or expansive.
    Chain-of-Thought Prompt Sequence

    1. Role Assignment      Supply the model its purpose, e.g., "You will be applying category labels to passages."
    2. Code Definition      Provide the code title(s) and description(s).
    3. Justification        Request that the model provide evidence of its reasoning.
    4. Decision             Instruct the model to list the codes that apply to the passage in a consistent format.




analysis. Development of an LLM adapted codebook is feasible for anyone regardless of technical skill by interacting
with an LLM through chat-like Web platforms provided by proprietary model developers. However, systematically
testing prompts or applying a completed codebook to the full dataset requires moderate skill in writing scripts in a
language such as Python. Rather than suggest that all scholars become programmers, we encourage researchers to
develop partnerships with students or community members seeking programming or research experience as a form of
project-based education. Conversely, we suggest that data scientists pursue partnerships with traditional social scientists
and humanists, who are often better positioned to develop coding schema to flush out complex meanings embedded in
text, which are now more tractable to machine learning.

Handling passages where model interpretation is poor. Overwhelmingly, GPT-4’s interpretations were accurate
and human-like. However, we found repeatedly that GPT-4, like a human reader, struggled with edge cases, especially
where implicit information was required to make a judgment. We are encouraged by this finding, and argue that with
automated analysis, fidelity is less important than it is with humans. Because statistical power increases with the
number of observations, noise is more tolerable in machine-applied codes, as automated coding potentially increases
sample size by orders of magnitude. Notably, this assumes that error is restricted to edge cases and is not otherwise
systematically biased. We also advise against automated coding where datasets are small, as in interviews, where
it is likely as efficient to code entirely by hand. As models improve and can provide confidence estimates for their
statements [33–35], ML content analysis workflows should include manual review of passages with uncertain code
assignments. Anecdotally, we found that GPT-4 could intelligently reflect on its responses when prompted to do so.
When presented the output of another model instance, GPT-4, acting as an untrained “critic” model [36], was often
able to identify when it had encountered an edge case without prompting, as well as recognize and revise obvious
mistakes. Our experiences suggest that a human-in-the-loop tag-for-manual-review workflow or a two-step automated
reflect-and-revise workflow may already be feasible with GPT-4 and similar models.


4      Conclusion

Our results using state-of-the-art models lead us to recommend that scholars who do much qualitative coding consider
automated coding with LLMs a potentially viable option today. We especially encourage skeptics to probe these tools’


                                                              8
Scalable Content Analysis with LLMs


capacities, as it is useful to know their limitations. Over the next year, models such as those incorporating memory [37],
(multi-)agential models that dialogue and revise prior to rendering output [38, 39], and architectures that can handle
larger inputs [40], will almost certainly greatly improve upon GPT-4’s current abilities. When those models are made
available, researchers who have already experimented with LLMs will be best positioned to make use of the new tools.
The efficiency of automation is compelling, but we are most enthusiastic about the ability to probe much larger datasets
than ever before, potentially illuminating patterns too rare or too fuzzy to detect with a sample numbering in the tens or
hundreds rather than thousands or beyond.

Acknowledgments

The author thanks Harry Yan, Pat Wall, Patrick Kaminski, Adam Fisch, Alicia Chen, and Francisco Muñoz for their
helpful comments toward improving this manuscript. I am especially grateful to Tania Ravaei for collaborating on
codebook development.

References
 [1] Anselm L Strauss. 1967. The discovery of grounded theory: Strategies for qualitative research. Aldine.
 [2] Johnny Saldaña. 2009. The coding manual for qualitative researchers. SAGE Publications.
 [3] Momin M Malik. 2020. A hierarchy of limitations in machine learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.05193.
 [4] Laura K Nelson. 2017. Computational Grounded Theory: A methodological framework. Sociological Methods &
     Research, 49(1):3–42.
 [5] Ankita Dhar, Himadri Mukherjee, Niladri Sekhar Dash, and Kaushik Roy. 2021. Text categorization: past and
     present. Artificial Intelligence Review, 54:3007–3054.
 [6] Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen Eldan, Johannes Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Ece Kamar, Peter Lee,
     Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott Lundberg, et al. 2023. Sparks of artificial general intelligence: Early experiments
     with GPT-4. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12712.
 [7] Bernardino Romera-Paredes, Mohammadamin Barekatain, Alexander Novikov, Matej Balog, M Pawan Kumar,
     Emilien Dupont, Francisco JR Ruiz, Jordan S Ellenberg, Pengming Wang, Omar Fawzi, et al. 2023. Mathematical
     discoveries from program search with large language models. Nature, 625:1–3.
 [8] Gemini Team, Rohan Anil, Sebastian Borgeaud, Yonghui Wu, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jiahui Yu, Radu Soricut,
     Johan Schalkwyk, Andrew M Dai, Anja Hauth, et al. 2023. Gemini: A family of highly capable multimodal
     models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11805.
 [9] Ziang Xiao, Xingdi Yuan, Q Vera Liao, Rania Abdelghani, and Pierre-Yves Oudeyer. 2023. Supporting qualitative
     analysis with large language models: Combining codebook with GPT-3 for deductive coding. In Companion
     Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces.
[10] Robert Chew, John Bollenbacher, Michael Wenger, Jessica Speer, and Annice Kim. 2023. LLM-assisted content
     analysis: Using large language models to support deductive coding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.14924.
[11] Shih-Chieh Dai, Aiping Xiong, and Lun-Wei Ku. 2023. LLM-in-the-loop: Leveraging large language model for
     thematic analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.15100.
[12] Robert H Tai, Lillian R Bentley, Xin Xia, Jason M Sitt, Sarah C Fankhauser, Ana M Chicas-Mosier, and Barnas G
     Monteith. 2023. An examination of the use of large language models to aid analysis of textual data. bioRxiv
     preprint bioRxiv:2023.07.17.549361.
[13] Ammar Ismael Kadhim. 2019. Survey on supervised machine learning techniques for automatic text classification.
     Artificial Intelligence Review, 52(1):273–292.
[14] David M Blei, Andrew Y Ng, and Michael I Jordan. 2003. Latent Dirichlet allocation. Journal of Machine
     Learning Research, 3(1):993–1022.
[15] Hamed Jelodar, Yongli Wang, Chi Yuan, Xia Feng, Xiahui Jiang, Yanchao Li, and Liang Zhao. 2019. Latent
     Dirichlet allocation (LDA) and topic modeling: Models, applications, a survey. Multimedia Tools and Applications,
     78:15169–15211.
[16] Maarten Grootendorst. 2022. BERTopic: Neural topic modeling with a class-based TF-IDF procedure. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2203.05794.


                                                            9
Scalable Content Analysis with LLMs


[17] Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Nee-
     lakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. 2020. Language models are few-shot learners.
     Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:1877–1901.
[18] Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée Lacroix,
     Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. 2023. LLaMa: Open and efficient foundation
     language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971.
[19] MistralAI. 2023. Mixtral of experts: A high quality sparse mixture-of-experts. https://mistral.ai/news/
     mixtral-of-experts. Accessed: 2024-01-13.
[20] Anthropic. 2023. Claude 2. https://www.anthropic.com/index/claude-2. Accessed: 2024-01-18.
[21] Jan Nowakowski and Jan Keller. 2024. AI-powered patching: The future of automated vulnerability fixes. Google
     Security Engineering Technical Report.
[22] Carlos Gómez-Rodríguez and Paul Williams. 2023. A confederacy of models: A comprehensive evaluation of
     LLMs on creative writing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08433.
[23] Manon Bischoff. 2024. AI matches the abilities of the best Math Olympians. Scientific American.
[24] Werner Vach and Oke Gerke. 2023. Gwet’s AC1 is not a substitute for Cohen’s kappa – A comparison of basic
     properties. MethodsX, 10:102212.
[25] Etienne Ollion, Rubing Shen, Ana Macanovic, and Arnault Chatelain. 2023. ChatGPT for text annotation? Mind
     the hype! SocArXiv preprint doi:10.31235/osf.io/x58kn.
[26] Anselm Strauss and Juliet M Corbin. 1997. Grounded theory in practice. SAGE Publications.
[27] OpenAI. 2023. GPT-4. https://openai.com/research/gpt-4. Accessed: 2024-01-18.
[28] Weizhe Yuan, Richard Yuanzhe Pang, Kyunghyun Cho, Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Jing Xu, and Jason Weston. 2024.
     Self-rewarding language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.10020.
[29] Sondos Mahmoud Bsharat, Aidar Myrzakhan, and Zhiqiang Shen. 2023. Principled instructions are all you need
     for questioning LLaMA-1/2, GPT-3.5/4. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.16171.
[30] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou, et al.
     2022. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in Neural Information
     Processing Systems, 35:24824–24837.
[31] Aman Madaan and Amir Yazdanbakhsh. 2022. Text and patterns: For effective chain of thought, it takes two to
     tango. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.07686.
[32] Zheng Chu, Jingchang Chen, Qianglong Chen, Weijiang Yu, Tao He, Haotian Wang, Weihua Peng, Ming Liu,
     Bing Qin, and Ting Liu. 2023. A survey of chain of thought reasoning: Advances, frontiers and future. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2309.15402.
[33] Zhen Lin, Shubhendu Trivedi, and Jimeng Sun. 2023. Generating with confidence: Uncertainty quantification for
     black-box large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.19187.
[34] Kaitlyn Zhou, Dan Jurafsky, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. 2023. Navigating the grey area: Expressions of
     overconfidence and uncertainty in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13439.
[35] Chen, Jiefeng and Yoon, Jinsung. 2024. Introducing ASPIRE for selective prediction in LLMs. https:
     //blog.research.google/2024/01/introducing-aspire-for-selective.html?m=1. Accessed: 2024-01-
     20.
[36] Debjit Paul, Mete Ismayilzada, Maxime Peyrard, Beatriz Borges, Antoine Bosselut, Robert West, and Boi Faltings.
     2023. REFINER: Reasoning feedback on intermediate representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.01904.
[37] Noah Shinn, Beck Labash, and Ashwin Gopinath. 2023. Reflexion: An autonomous agent with dynamic memory
     and self-reflection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.11366.
[38] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. 2022. ReAct:
     Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629.
[39] Zhenran Xu, Senbao Shi, Baotian Hu, Jindi Yu, Dongfang Li, Min Zhang, and Yuxiang Wu. 2023. Towards
     reasoning in large language models via multi-agent peer review collaboration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.08152.
[40] Albert Gu and Tri Dao. 2023. Mamba: Linear-time sequence modeling with selective state spaces. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2312.00752.




                                                        10
