A Large Language Model Supported Synthesis of
Contemporary Academic Integrity Research Trends

Thomas Lancaster

Imperial College London, United Kingdom



Abstract
This paper reports on qualitative content analysis undertaken using ChatGPT, a Large Language Model
(LLM), to identify primary research themes in current academic integrity research as well as the
methodologies used to explore these areas. The analysis by the LLM identified 7 research themes and
13 key areas for exploration. The outcomes from the analysis suggest that much contemporary research
in the academic integrity field is guided by technology. Technology is often explored as potential way of
preventing academic misconduct, but this could also be a limiting factor when aiming to promote a
culture of academic integrity. The findings underscore that LLM led research may be option in the
academic integrity field, but that there is also a need for continued traditional research. The findings
also indicate that researchers and educational providers should continue to develop policy and
operational frameworks for academic integrity. This will help to ensure that academic standards are
maintained across the wide range of settings that are present in modern education.



Introduction
Academic integrity, a fundamental principle underpinning the credibility and quality of educational
institutions worldwide, has garnered increasing attention in recent years. With the rapid evolution of
educational technologies and methodologies, the landscape of academic integrity faces both new
challenges and opportunities. This paper aims to provide an overview of the current research themes
in academic integrity and the research approaches used to explore these themes, offering insights into
the various aspects that shape this critical field. ChatGPT has been used as a guiding force in the
construction of the paper, suggesting that a Large Language Model (LLM) like this may have a role to
play in the future of academic integrity research and practice.

Academic integrity can be considered as an adherence to ethical and professional principles, standards,
and values in education, research, and scholarship (ENAI, 2018). It embodies a commitment to
fundamental values like honesty, trust, fairness, respect, responsibility, and courage (ICAI, 2021). These
principles of behaviour allow academic communities to transform ideals into actions, guiding decisions
and actions in the academic realm (Guerrero-Dib et al., 2020). Bertram Gallant (2016) emphasises that
academic integrity should be integral to every academic endeavour, particularly in teaching and learning
processes, aiming for academic excellence.

Examples of honest academic behaviours include being truthful, objective, crediting other authors'
works, consistently applying policies, and addressing wrongdoings (ENAI, 2018; ICAI, 2021). In
contrast, dishonest behaviours comprise acts like copying, using unauthorized materials during exams,
plagiarism, collusion, falsifying data, impersonation, and various forms of contract cheating (Morris &
Carroll, 2016). These behaviours are seen as fraudulent attempts to gain undeserved academic benefits
and are often the focus of academic integrity research and assessments (McCabe, 2016; Rettinger &
Bertram Gallant, 2022).

The concept of academic integrity should extend far beyond dishonest acts like these. Academic
integrity encompasses a broad spectrum of ethical practices essential for the development of a reliable
and trustworthy academic environment. Guerrero-Dib et al. (2023) give emphasis to the correlation
between academic integrity and workplace ethics, advocating for demographic analysis, targeted
interventions, continuous reminders of the benefits of ethical behaviour and the implementation of
recognition schemes to incentivise it. They stress the importance of addressing academic dishonesty
to prevent a culture of impunity and deterioration of ethical standards. Morris (2023) states that
misconduct should be managed in a consistent, accessible and equitable manner, whilst recognising
the diversity of the student body, and providing opportunities for discussion.

As these examples show, there is always a need to re-examine the traditional approaches used to
uphold academic integrity, particularly with the proliferation of digital tools and the shift to blended and
online learning. As such, understanding the current dynamics and dimensions of academic integrity is
crucial for educators, administrators, and policymakers alike. Much of the current international work on
academic integrity is disseminated as academic research publications, but such research also needs
to be both inclusive and context sensitive.

This paper reports on a study that used ChatGPT to employ a qualitative content analysis methodology
to analyse the prevalent research themes in academic integrity as of early 2023. Using the LLMs internal
representations of research findings, which have been developed from sources including journal
articles, conference proceedings, and educational reports, this paper identifies key focus areas in the
field. The aim is to distil the essence of current research in academic integrity, providing a synthesised
view that captures the nuanced views surrounding academic integrity and which can guide future
research and practice.



Background
Academic integrity is a both a practitioner field and a research field, although a possible criticism of the
field is that research tends to evolve through practice rather than following a formalised process. The
field appears strongly shaped by the development of technology, often due to the barriers to academic
integrity that new technology can introduce. Levin (2012) emphasised the importance of rigor in action
research on academic integrity, suggesting research partnering, controlling biases, standardized
methods, and exploring alternative explanations to enhance the trustworthiness of research findings.

Several authors have previously attempted to capture the current state of academic research, although
such publications can quickly become dated in a fast-moving field. For instance, Macfarlane et al. (2014)
employed multivariate analysis to analyse academic integrity research as part of a comprehensive
literature review and found the use of surveys and questionnaires to be commonplace. An example of
the use of such an approach could be observed in Lanier (2006) who examined the prevalence of
cheating in online versus traditional lecture courses, surveying 1,262 students.

An alternative method of exploring current research publications was introduced by Lancaster (2021),
who used Natural Language Processing (NLP) techniques to analyse a dataset of 8,507 academic
integrity papers. This approach, involving bigram analysis and sentiment analysis, provided insights into
the linguistic patterns and sentiments in academic integrity research.

Documentary analysis is another prevalent method. Fielden and Joyce (2008) applied a multi-
stakeholder, multi-level theoretical framework to analyse 125 published papers on academic integrity,
focusing on the authors' moral judgments and views on academic integrity. Eaton et al. (2020) shared
their methodological decisions regarding data collection in academic integrity policy analysis,
emphasizing the importance of collaborative research teams and meticulous documentation.

Qualitative research methods, including interviews, seem to be integral to understanding the nuances
of academic integrity. Macfarlane et al. (2014) incorporated interviews in their literature review, while
Gaižauskaitė and Valavičienė (2023) highlighted the application of social sciences research methods,
such as qualitative interviewing, in academic integrity research.

The increasing prevalence of online learning has also necessitated specific methodological
approaches. Holden et al. (2021) provided a review of academic integrity in online assessment,
addressing the motivations for cheating and methods for preventing and detecting dishonest behaviours
in this context.
Overall, these varied methodologies reflect the complexity of academic integrity research, ranging from
quantitative surveys to qualitative interviews and advanced NLP techniques. Each approach contributes
uniquely to understanding the different facets of academic integrity. They also indicate why a current
synthesis of academic integrity research will be so useful for providing future direction for the field.



Methodology
The focus of this paper is to identify current trends and themes of academic integrity research, as well
as the methodological options for exploring those trends. Data to support this was gathered in January
2024 using ChatGPT Pro running GPT 4 and using ChatGPT’s internal database of information. Fig. 1
shows the process followed to identify current academic integrity research themes. The process was
developed and conducted by the ChatGPT LLM with human oversight.



                         Figure 1 – Methodological process overview flowchart




The methodology was implemented by ChatGPT, which reported details of its approach over the five
stages as follows:

Stage 1 - Data Collection: ChatGPT accessed its internal database of information, which includes a
wide range of academic literature, journal articles, conference proceedings, and educational reports up
to April 2023. This database served as the primary source for extracting data relevant to the field of
academic integrity.
Stage 2 - Identification of Themes: ChatGPT employed an iterative approach to identify major
research themes within the academic integrity literature. Initial themes were discerned based on the
recurrence and prominence of topics within the dataset. These themes were refined through
comparative analysis to ensure accurate representation of key research areas.

Stage 3 - Development of Comparative Columns: For each identified theme, ChatGPT established
several comparative columns, including 'Key Focus Areas', 'Methodologies Commonly Used', 'Recent
Developments or Findings', and 'Geographic Focus'. This structure was chosen to enable a detailed
and comparative overview of the research themes.

Stage 4 - Data Synthesis and Analysis: ChatGPT synthesized the data from its dataset according to
the identified themes and comparative columns. This step involved organizing relevant information to
reflect the current trends, methodologies, and geographic focuses within each theme.

Stage 5 - Validation and Refinement: The AI model reviewed the initial version of the table for
accuracy, coherence, and comprehensiveness. Adjustments were made to ensure that the table
accurately encapsulated the state of academic integrity research as of early 2023.



Results
The structured and systematic overview generated of the academic integrity research landscape in
shown in Table 1, which identified 7 themes, covering 13 key areas. The overview is based on data
available to ChatGPT, consisting of sources up until April 2023.



 Research          Key Focus             Methodologies     Recent                Geographic Focus
 Theme             Areas                 Commonly          Developments or
                                         Used              Findings
 Plagiarism        Software tools,       Computational     Advancements in       Global, with emphasis
 Detection         Text-matching         analysis,         AI-based              on Higher Education
                   techniques            Surveys           detection systems     Institutions in North
                                                                                 America and Europe
 Policy and        Development of        Case studies,     Shift towards         Predominantly North
 Ethics in         integrity policies,   Policy analysis   more holistic and     America and Europe
 Education         Ethical                                 preventative
                   education                               approaches
 Cheating          Causes of             Surveys,          Increased focus       Global, with numerous
 Behaviours        cheating,             Psychological     on online learning    studies in Asia and
 among Students    Prevention            assessments       environments          Australia
                   strategies
 Faculty           Training and          Interviews,       Emphasis on           North America,
 Perspectives      awareness,            Surveys           faculty training      Europe, and some
 and Responses     Reporting                               and support           parts of Asia
                   behaviours                              systems
 Cross-Cultural    Differences in        Comparative       Insights into         Global, with specific
 Comparisons       perceptions and       studies,          cultural influences   focus on comparisons
                   practices             Ethnographic      on academic           between Western and
                                         research          integrity             Eastern educational
                                                                                 systems
 Technology in     Use of online         Technology        Evaluation of the     Primarily in
 Academic          proctoring,           assessment,       impact of remote      technologically
 Integrity         Digital               User experience   proctoring and AI     advanced regions
                   assessment            studies           tools
                   tools
 Legal and           Regulations          Legal analysis,     Analysis of legal     Mostly in the United
 Institutional       impacting            Institutional       responses to          States, Europe, and
 Frameworks          academic             research            academic              some Asian countries
                     integrity,                               misconduct
                     Institutional
                     policies
                           Table 1 – The academic integrity research landscape



Fig. 2 shows the relationships between the research themes and the commonly used methodologies. It
should be noted that this does not exclude methodologies being used to research themes that they are
connected to in Fig. 2, but it does capture that surveys are often used as the de facto methodology for
academic integrity research, even if other methodologies may be more appropriate.



                  Figure 2 – Relationship between research themes and methodologies




Discussion and Conclusions
The findings of this study, as illustrated in Table 1, highlight the dynamic nature of academic integrity in
the modern educational landscape, shaped by technological advancements and diverse cultural
contexts. The study underscores the importance of shifting to a multifaceted approach to academic
integrity, with current research addressing academic integrity from multiple viewpoints. This also
indicates that most of the world is involved with academic integrity research, although the exact focus
of that research varies by location.

One of the notable observations from the outcomes shown in Table 1 is the evolution of academic
integrity issues with the advent of digital technologies. The proliferation of online resources and the
ease of information access enabled by these have brought about new challenges in plagiarism and
cheating. To counteract that, individuals and commercial companies alike have developed sophisticated
detection tools and strategies. However, the ethical implications of surveillance tools like online
proctoring software raise concerns about privacy and trust in educational environments and threaten to
undermine the relationship between teaching staff and their students, where ICAI (2021) continue to
recommend that trust is considered as a fundamental value of academic integrity.

The cultural dimensions of academic integrity revealed in this study underscore the need for context-
specific strategies. The one-size-fits-all approach may be seen as inadequate. Educational institutions
must consider cultural variances in understanding and practicing academic integrity to develop more
effective and inclusive policies.

Faculty and institutional roles in upholding academic integrity continue to be a critical area. The findings
suggest that while policy development is essential, the implementation and enforcement of these
policies are equally important in creating a culture of integrity.

Emerging trends indicate a shift towards educative approaches to academic misconduct, moving away
from purely punitive measures. This aligns with the recent focus on developing students' understanding
and commitment to academic integrity, rather than solely penalising misconduct.

As the field of academic integrity continues to evolve, future research should focus on the long-term
effectiveness of current strategies, the impact of emerging technologies, and the development of
inclusive, culturally sensitive approaches. It is hoped that this paper will contribute to the ongoing
dialogue in academic integrity, showing how LLMs like ChatGPT can be used in this field, whilst also
providing insights and directions for educators, policymakers, and researchers in their efforts to ensure
that academic integrity is at the heart of the educational system.



References
Bertram Gallant, T. (2016). Systems approach to going forward. In T. Bretag (Ed.), Handbook of
academic integrity (pp. 975–978). Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-287-098-8_81

Bertram Gallant, T. (2017). Academic integrity as a teaching & learning issue: From theory to practice.
Theory Into Practice, 56(2), 88-94. https://doi.org/10.1080/00405841.2017.1308173

Eaton, S. E., Stoesz, B. M., Thacker, E. J., & Miron, J. B. (2020). Methodological decisions in
undertaking academic integrity policy analysis: Considerations for future research. Canadian
Perspectives on Academic Integrity, 3(1), 83–91. https://doi.org/10.11575/cpai.v3i1.69768

ENAI.     (2018).   Glossary    for   academic           integrity.   https://academicintegrity.eu/wp/wp-
content/uploads/2022/07/Glossary_revised_final.pdf

Fielden, K., & Joyce, D. (2008). An analysis of published research on academic integrity. International
Journal for Educational Integrity, 4(2). https://doi.org/10.21913/IJEI.v4i2.411

Gaižauskaitė, I., & Valavičienė, N. (2023). Researching academic integrity: application of social
sciences research methods. In Academic Integrity in the Social Sciences: Perspectives on Pedagogy
and Practice (pp. 147-164). Cham: Springer International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
031-43292-7_10

Guerrero-Dib, J.G., Portales, L., Gallego, D. (2023). Academic integrity as a way to promote workplace
ethical behaviour. In: Curtis, G.J. (eds) Academic Integrity in the Social Sciences. Ethics and Integrity
in Educational Contexts, vol 6. Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-43292-7_11

Guerrero-Dib, J. G., Portales, L., & Heredia-Escorza, Y. (2020). Impact of academic integrity on
workplace ethical behaviour. International Journal for Educational Integrity, 16(1).
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40979-020-0051-3
Holden, O. L., Norris, M. E., & Kuhlmeier, V. A. (2021, July). Academic integrity in online assessment:
A research review. In Frontiers in Education (Vol. 6, p. 639814). Frontiers Media SA.
https://doi.org/10.3389/feduc.2021.639814

ICAI.       (2021).        The       fundamental       values          of       academic          integrity.
https://academicintegrity.org/resources/fundamental-values

Lancaster, T. (2021). Academic dishonesty or academic integrity? Using Natural Language Processing
(NLP) techniques to investigate positive integrity in academic integrity research. Journal of Academic
Ethics, 19(3), 363-383. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10805-021-09422-4

Lanier, M. M. (2006). Academic integrity and distance learning. Journal of criminal justice education,
17(2), 244-261. https://doi.org/10.1080/10511250600866166

Levin, M. (2012). Academic integrity in action research. Action Research, 10(2), 133-149.
https://doi.org/10.1177/14767503124450

Macfarlane, B., Zhang, J., & Pun, A. (2014). Academic integrity: a review of the literature. Studies in
higher education, 39(2), 339-358. https://doi.org/10.1080/03075079.2012.709495

McCabe, D. (2016). Cheating and honor: Lessons from a long-term research project. In T. Bretag (Ed.),
Handbook of academic integrity (pp. 187–198). Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-287-098-
8_35

Morris, E.J. (2023). Integrating academic integrity: An educational approach. In: Eaton, S.E. (eds)
Handbook of Academic Integrity. Springer, Singapore. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-287-079-7_96-
1

Morris, E. J., & Carroll, J. (2016). Developing a sustainable holistic institutional approach: Dealing with
realities “on the ground” when implementing an academic integrity policy. In T. Bretag (Ed.), Handbook
of academic integrity (pp. 449–462). Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-287-079-7_23-

Rettinger, D., & Bertram Gallant, T. (Eds.). (2022). Cheating academic integrity: Lessons from 30 years
of research. Jossey-Bass.



Acknowledgements
The author notes that ChatGPT was used to help develop this paper and to draft much of the text prior
to human editing. This paper has itself been developed primarily as a case study for purposes of
academic integrity and research integrity. It should be considered primarily as a case study of ChatGPT
enabled research opportunities, rather than as an example of traditional peer reviewed research.
