                                         Can Large Language Models Serve as Data Analysts?
                                          A Multi-Agent Assisted Approach for Qualitative
                                                          Data Analysis
                                          Zeeshan Rasheeda , Muhammad Waseema , Aakash Ahmad1 , Kai-Kristian
                                            Kemella , Wang Xiaofeng1 , Anh Nguyen Ducb , Pekka Abrahamssona




arXiv:2402.01386v2 [cs.SE] 12 Oct 2025
                                               Faculty of Computing and Communications, Lancaster University Leipzig
                                                      Faculty of Engineering, Free University of Bozen Bolzano
                                                                     a
                                                                       Tampere University, Finland
                                                           b
                                                               University of South Eastern Norway, Norway




                                         Abstract
                                              Context: Manual qualitative data analysis is time-intensive and can
                                         compromise validity and replicability, affecting analysis design, implemen-
                                         tation, and reporting. Large Language Models (LLMs) enable human-bot
                                         collaboration in Software Engineering (SE), but their potential for qualita-
                                         tive data analysis in SE remains largely unexplored.
                                              Objective: The objective of this study is to design and develop an LLM-
                                         based multi-agent system that synergizes human decision support with AI to
                                         automate various qualitative data analysis approaches.
                                              Methods: We used LLM-based multi-agents systems to assist the quali-
                                         tative data analysis process, deploying 27 agents, each responsible for a spe-
                                         cific task, such as text summarization, initial code generation, and extracting
                                         themes and patterns.
                                              Results: The main findings are: (1) the LLM-based multi-agent system
                                         accelerates the qualitative data analysis process, (2) the system effectively
                                         automates tasks such as text summarization, initial code generation, and
                                         theme extraction, and (3) the publicly accessible code facilitates validation
                                         and further evaluation.
                                              Conclusion: The proposed LLM-based multi-agent system automates
                                         qualitative data analysis process, creating opportunities for researchers and
                                         practitioners. Future improvements focus on enhancing multilingual perfor-
                                         mance and integrating continuous expert feedback. The source code of pro-
posed system and system details can be found here: https://github.com/GPT-
Laboratory/Qualitative-Analysis-with-an-LLM-Based-Agentts
Keywords: Large Language Models, Qualitative Data Analysis,
Multi-Agent Systems, Automation, Empirical Software Engineering


1. Introduction
    Large Language Models (LLMs) have transformed academia and vari-
ous other fields by offering advanced capabilities in Natural Language Pro-
cessing (NLP), automated content generation, and data analysis [1, 2, 3].
For instance, LLMs like Generative Pre-training Transformer (GPT) and
Llama have shown capabilities in understanding, interpreting, and generat-
ing human-like text, making them crucial systems across various domains
(e.g., sentiment analysis and document summarization) [4]. This technol-
ogy has opened new directions in various domains of Software Engineering
(SE) [5, 6]. The adoption of LLMs in SE is primarily driven by an innova-
tive approach that transforms many SE tasks into activities involving data
analysis and text classification. LLMs have shown promise in performing var-
ious SE tasks, including software development, text classification, and data
analysis[7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12].
    In the domain of qualitative data analysis in empirical SE, LLMs can
also play an important role[13]. LLMs can automate the extraction and in-
terpretation of large volumes of text data [13]. For instance, the traditional
approach to data analysis is highly dependent on human expertise, which
consumes more time and human effort. Qualitative data analysis is depen-
dent on primary data in the form of unstructured text or recordings from
interviews. Software systems commonly employed for this purpose include
MAXQDA [14], Nvivo [15], Atlas.ti [16], Dedoose [17], WebQDA [18] , and
QDAMiner [19]. However, these systems require human input, where re-
searchers manually perform coding, interpret text, and make decisions. This
process is time-consuming and requires a highly specific skill set and expertise
to ensure the rigor of data analysis.
    These traditional approaches to data analysis depend on human exper-
tise, including survey instrumentation, statistical analysis, and interpreta-
tion. However, with LLMs, there is a paradigm shift towards more auto-
mated, intelligent systems [20]. Torii et al. [21] mentioned, LLMs have the
potential to autonomously perform qualitative data analysis, such as analyz-

                                       2
ing user feedback, software documentation, and development logs to extract
valuable insights. By doing so, LLMs enhance the efficiency of data analysis
and bring a level of depth to the interpretation of qualitative data, which was
previously challenging to achieve [22]. Several researchers, including Chew
et al. [20], Dai et al. [23], and Xiao et al. [13] explored the potential of
LLMs in qualitative data analysis. However, their efforts primarily focus on
automating thematic analysis and content analysis approaches to generate
initial codes. Despite these advancements, a notable gap persists in the de-
velopment of LLM-based systems that can autonomously perform all types
of qualitative data analysis processes. Further research and development are
required to address this gap and fully utilize the capabilities of LLMs within
qualitative research methodologies.
    In this paper, we propose an LLM-based multi-agent system to assist
and automate the qualitative data analysis process, addressing challenges
in scalability and efficiency. From the various qualitative research methods,
we assist the five most popular methods used in SE: content analysis [24],
thematic analysis [25], narrative analysis [26], grounded theory data analysis
[27], and discourse analysis [28]. The proposed system analyzes large tex-
tual datasets and interview transcripts to autonomously perform qualitative
data analysis. It integrates LLMs to help researchers handle diverse datasets
and accelerate the analysis process with improved performance. Primary
contributions of this study are:

   • An LLM-based multi-agent system synergises human decision support
     with AI to automate various qualitative data analysis approaches, in-
     cluding thematic analysis, grounded theory, content analysis, narrative
     analysis, and discourse analysis.

   • The integration of LLMs based system into the qualitative analysis pro-
     cess allows researchers to handle large and diverse datasets and speed
     up the process. This reduces reliance on manual processes, making
     data analysis more efficient and accessible.

   Implication of research: The results of this research can provide foun-
dations to researchers who can formulate new hypotheses about the role of
LLMs and explore processes, patterns, and methods for LLM-driven data
analysis. Software practitioners and data analysts can follow the reported
results to experiment with delegating analytical tasks of data analysis to
LLMs.

                                      3
   Structure of the paper: The rest of the paper is organized as follows.
We review related work in Section 2 and describe the study methodology in
Section 3. The results of this study are presented in Section 4. A discussion
on key findings and their implications is provided in Section 5. The study
concludes with future work in Section 6.

2. Background
    In this section, we briefly present the background of the study with a focus
on existing research. Section 2.1 provides an overview of studies concerning
LLMs and SE. Section 2.2 provides a background study on qualitative data
analysis in SE. Finally, section 2.3 examines works that have utilized LLMs
for qualitative data analysis.

2.1. Large Language Models in Software Engineering
    In recent years, LLMs have experienced a rapid advancement in vari-
ous SE applications [29]. As Treude et al. [30] mentioned, the LLM and
SE are interconnected through the application of NLP techniques to various
tasks within the software development lifecycle. LLM’s language genera-
tion capabilities offer valuable assistance and enhancements to SE processes
[31, 32]. The integration of LLMs into SE has marked a major transforma-
tion in this field [33]. LLMs have demonstrated valuable advantages over
traditional methods like models guided by domain-specific languages, proba-
bilistic grammars, and basic neural language models. Nowadays, LLMs have
been applied to various field of SE. These include data analysis [34], text
classification [35], software development [12], code search [36], unit test case
generation [37], automated program repair [38], and many other.
    Hou et al. [39] conducted a systematic review of 229 papers (2017–2023)
on the use of LLMs in SE. They examined different LLM types, data pro-
cessing techniques, performance optimization methods, and SE tasks where
LLMs have been successfully applied, highlighting key challenges, research
gaps, and future directions.
    Zheng et al. [40] reviewed the integration of LLMs into SE, categorizing
SE tasks into seven types and highlighting application examples, strengths,
and limitations. They identified key challenges, including inconsistent LLM
performance, limited evaluation of code-centric models, and the need for
customized models tailored to specific SE tasks. Zheng et al. [41] examined
the effectiveness of LLMs in the context of SE. They reviewed and evaluated

                                       4
134 studies focused on code LLMs, highlighting the connections between
code-specific LLMs and general-purpose LLMs. Furthermore, they conducted
an in-depth analysis of how both general and code LLMs perform in various
SE tasks, providing a detailed assessment of their capabilities across different
sub-tasks.
    Shin et al. [42] explored the capabilities of GPT-4 by integrating var-
ious prompting techniques (such as basic prompts, context learning, and
task-specific prompts) to assess its performance on three common SE tasks:
code generation, code summarization, and code translation. They compared
GPT-4’s performance with 18 other fine-tuned LLMs. Additionally, Li et al.
[43] demonstrated the effectiveness of fine-tuning and prompt engineering in
automating code reviews, highlighting the role of context-rich prompts in
improving model accuracy. Marvin et al. [44] highlighted the adaptability of
prompt engineering across diverse SE applications, suggesting its potential
to optimize resource allocation in LLM-driven workflows. Together, these
studies underline the critical importance of combining personalized prompt-
ing techniques with fine-tuning to enhance LLM performance in varied SE
contexts.

2.2. Qualitative Data Analysis in Empirical Software Engineering
    Qualitative research is a type of research that focuses on collecting and
analyzing non-numerical data (e.g., text, video, or audio) to understand
concepts, opinions, or experiences [45]. As Seaman et al. [46] mentioned,
qualitative methods are adopted and incorporated into SE research, which
help researchers produce richer and more informative results. Qualitative
data analysis in SE involves systematic examination of non-numerical ele-
ments like developer experiences, user feedback, design ideas, and processes
efficiency[47]. Seaman et al. [46] introduces qualitative methods in empir-
ical SE. In this paper, Seaman proposed that new research methods are
important for examining non-technical aspects and that qualitative methods
can be adapted and integrated into the design of empirical studies in SE.
Motivated by inconsistent review standards, Dittrich et al. [48] proposed
common evaluation criteria for qualitative research quality. In this paper,
they proposed eight criteria that highlight the importance of clarity in the
contribution of qualitative studies. Dittrich et al also highlights the need for
detailed procedures in qualitative data analysis to improve the understanding
and interpretation of results.


                                       5
    Among the qualitative research methods, content analysis [24], thematic
analysis [25], narrative analysis [26], grounded theory [27], and discourse
analysis [28] are the most popular in empirical SE researchers [49], [24]. A
content analysis extract the meaning of words or concepts and “goes be-
yond only counting words to analyze language extensively for the purpose of
classifying big amounts of text into an effective number of categories with
same meanings” [50]. According to Exton et al. [51], researchers use content
analysis to quantify the usage of SE design patterns as a means of commu-
nication within empirical SE communities. Thematic analysis is very similar
to content analysis. However, it differs in that the themes are typically not
quantified [52]. Thematic analysis focuses on finding themes and also creat-
ing categories [25]. Narrative analysis is also a qualitative research method
used to understand and interpret the stories people tell about their lives and
experiences [53]. Catherine et al. [54] provided a overview of narrative meth-
ods in social research, cementing its place as a distinct qualitative method.
Grounded theory starts with a question or an existing theory, followed by a
thorough examination of the data. The data are analyzed through constant
comparative analysis, where they are tagged with codes and grouped into
concepts to identify themes [55]. Additionally, the data are analyzed during
the collection process, with the analyzed data guiding further data collection
[56]. Finally, discourse analysis is also a qualitative research method used to
study written or spoken language in its social context, focusing on the ways
language constructs meaning, identities, and power relations [57]. Zellig Har-
ris [58] invented the term “discourse analysis ” in the 1970s, and his studies
on face-to-face interaction laid foundational concepts [59]. In the 1980s and
1990s, scholars like Michel Foucault [60] and Norman Fairclough [61] ex-
panded the field, linking discourse to power structures and social change,
which led to the development of critical discourse analysis [62].
    These qualitative research methods are also used to analyze the quality
of SE studies [63], [26]. For instance, Stol et al. [64] reviewed 16 studies to
evaluate the quality of SE studies using grounded theory. They concluded
that many papers fail to generate a theory, do not clearly indicate which
variant of grounded theory is used, and lack sufficient methodological details
for rigorous evaluation. Additionally, the authors provided guidelines on how
to conduct and report grounded theory studies effectively.




                                      6
                Table 1: Automation qualitative methods using AI techniques
S No   Paper Title                                   Automation Tasks                              Reference
       Cody: An AI-based system to semi-automate     Automates coding through code rules
01                                                                                                 Rietz et al. [19]
       coding for qualitative research.              and supervised ML
       LLM-assisted content analysis: using large    Automate content analysis process with
02                                                                                                 Chew et al. [20]
       language models to support deductive coding   LLM
       LLM-in-the-loop: leveraging large
03                                                   Automate thematic analysis with LLM           Dai et al. [23]
       language model for thematic analysis
       Automated thematic analysis of health inf-
                                                     Automate thematic analysis method
04     ormation technology (hit) related incident                                                  Li et al. [65]
                                                     through NLP and ML
       reports
       Using LLMs for qualitative analysis can       Identified the bias in LLMs when using
05                                                                                                 Ashwin et al. [66]
       introduce serious bias                        for qualitative research
       Developing and testing an automated qua
                                                     AQUA, an AI assistant, offers transparent
06     litative assistant (AQUA) to support                                                        Lennon et al. [67]
                                                     and reliable coding of qualitative data
       qualitative analysis
                                                     Perform thematic analysis by using
07     Using ChatGPT for Thematic Analysis                                                         Turobov et al. [68]
                                                     ChatGPT
       Automation of Qualitative Content             Semi automate content analysis by using
08                                                                                                 Hoxtel et al. [69]
       Analysis: A Proposal                          ML techniques. Only automate the coding
       Semi-automated coding for qualitative         automate the tedious coding process, de-
09     research: A user-centered inquiry and         sire transparent systems that extend coding   Marathe et al. [70]
       initial prototypes                            to large datasets



2.3. Large Language Models in Qualitative Research
     In recent studies, LLMs have demonstrated their capability in tasks sim-
ilar to deductive coding, offering promising alternatives to traditional su-
pervised learning methods [13]. These models excel in both zero-shot (no
examples) and few-shot (few examples) learning scenarios, addressing some
of the limitations inherent in conventional approaches [20]. Tornberg [71] ob-
served that zero-shot GPT-4 annotations outperformed both crowd-workers
and experts in terms of accuracy and inter-rater reliability when identifying
the political affiliation of tweets from U.S. politicians. A study closely aligned
with our research by Xiao et al. [13] and Dai et al. [23] explored the poten-
tial of LLMs in deductive coding. However they just automate the thematic
analysis and content analysis approaches to generate initial codes. Their
findings suggested that prompts based on existing codebooks were more ef-
fective than those with exemplar coding decisions, though both approaches
fell short of expert coder performance. Building upon these foundations, our
work extends the use of LLMs in qualitative research by employing a multi-
agent system based on advanced LLMs to automate all types of qualitative
data analysis, representing a step forward beyond existing applications in
both scope and complexity. There is a lack of single platform that automate
all aspects of qualitative analysis. This study aims to bridge this gap by in-
troducing a platform that integrates LLMs with a multi-agent system. Our

                                                        7
approach aims to provide a versatile system that supports qualitative data
analysis using LLM-based AI agents.

3. Research Method
    This research aims to investigate the efficiency of LLMs to assist qualita-
tive data analysis in SE. Our methodology is structured into two phases, each
designed to test and analyze the capabilities of LLMs in this context. Be-
low we discuss how our LLM-based multi-agent system performs qualitative
analysis tasks.
3.1. Research Questions
    Considering the objective of our study, we have formulated the following
Research Questions (RQs):

   RQ1. How effective are LLM-based multi-agent systems to assist qual-
   itative data analysis?

    The main aim of RQ1 is to determine whether LLM-based multi-agent
systems are capable of assisting in qualitative data analysis. This question
was formulated to evaluate the ability of LLM-based agents to accurately
interpret and analyze complex textual data without human intervention.
3.2. System Design
     The section reports on how the proposed multi-agent system was devel-
oped to assist qualitative data analysis. In this project, we developed 27
agents, each of which is a specialized instance of an LLM, assigned a specific
task to perform. As shown in Figure 1, the proposed multi-agent system
receives diverse datasets from various sources. The multi-agent system pro-
cesses the input and sends requests to the OpenAI API environment. Finally,
the environment generates and returns a response. This is achieved by utiliz-
ing the capabilities of LLMs to understand and interpret complex language
structures, making it possible to automate the various aspects of qualita-
tive analysis such as thematic analysis, content analysis, narrative analysis,
discourse analysis and grounded theory generation. For a more in-depth un-
derstanding, we refer to Table 2, showing the diverse datasets employed in
our experiment and provides output in multiple formats, including a CSV
file, an output area, and documents or PDF files. Below, we discuss the
technical details of these agents.

                                      8
                            Table 2: Input and output data-source
  S.No   QDA Method            Input Data Source   Type of Dataset        Output Format
                               Links                                      CSV File
                               Prompt              Github/StackOverflow   Doc file
 1       Thematic Analysis
                               Upload Files        Developer Discussion
                                                                          Output Box
                               Voice Recording
                               Links                                      CSV File
 2       Content Analysis      Prompt              Customer Feedback      Doc file
                               Upload Files                               Output Box
                               Links               Blogs                  CSV File
 3       Narrative Analysis    Prompt                                     Doc file
                                                   Human Biography
                               Upload Files                               Output Box
                               Links               Customer Reviews       CSV File
 4       Discourse Analysis    Prompt                                     Doc file
                                                   Online Conversation
                               Upload Files                               Output Box
                               Links               Blogs                  CSV File
 5       Grounded Theory       Prompt                                     Doc file
                                                   Observations
                               Upload Files                               Output Box



3.2.1. LLM Based Multi-Agent System
    Firstly, we discuss the technical details of algorithm 01, which plays an
important role in facilitating communication between agents and users. As
shown in the proposed algorithm 01, the process begins by initializing the
OpenAI API key. Once the API is initialized, the algorithm reads the input
data provided by the user, which can consist of links, textual prompts, or
even audio files. After the input is processed, the next step is to submit
the input to the selected analysis method. For each selected type, the algo-
rithm initializes conversation histories and assigns modular agents to perform
specific tasks. Each agent performs a specific function, such as identifying
themes, coding categories, or transcribing narratives, depending on the anal-
ysis selected. The agents communicate through a series of interactions with
the OpenAI API, processing the input and generating the necessary insights.
For audio inputs, transcription and processing are handled using a speech
recognition module. Upon completing the analysis, the system parses the
results and saves them in the format specified by the user, such as a CSV file
or a JSON response. Below, we provide the technical details of each agent.
    Thematic analysis is a method used in qualitative research to iden-
tify, analyze, and report patterns (themes) within data [72]. It minimally
organizes and describes dataset in (rich) detail. It is usually applied to a
set of texts. As we can see in Table 3, we developed five agents that work
collaboratively to automatically perform thematic analysis on a given input.
The Agent Summary is responsible for receiving the input. This agent pri-


                                             9
                 1
                                         RQ-1                               RQ-2
              Research
                          Automating the QDA with LLM-          Analysing the Accuracy and
              Questions     based Multi-Agent Model            Efficiency of Multi-Agent Model

                            Textual
                             Data
                                                                           Thematic Analysis


                                                                            Content Analysis
                            Interview
                 2         Transcripts           Agent Interactions
             Solution                                                      Narrative Analysis
            Development
                                                                          Discourse Analysis
                             Case
                            Studies
                                                                           Grounded Theory

                                                Textual Environments


                          Data Sources          Multi-Agent Model               Data Analysis




                  3
              Solution
             Evaluation         Evaluators      Datasets       Questionnaire       Results




Figure 1: A workflow overview of the proposed system for automation of qualitative data
analysis


mary task is to summarize the text and remove any unnecessary data. The
first step is to configure scraper settings adapted to the structure of the dis-
cussion from the input data, ensuring the relevant information is captured
efficiently. Following this, the algorithm loads and parses the input data to
prepare it for summarization. The next step is to generates a clear and con-
cise paragraph that extract the required information from the input data.
This summary is then formatted and compiled into a structured format and
finally send the summarized data to Agent Coders for further action. The
Agent Coders receive the summarized data from the Agent Summary and
load the summarized data. The first step is to generate the initial codes
to meet thematic requirements. These initial codes pass through a review
process and make adjustment to ensure their accuracy and relevance. After


                                                  10
this review, the codes are compiled into a structured format. This structured
approach ensures that the thematic analysis codes are systematically gener-
ated, reviewed, and prepared for further thematic analysis tasks. Finally,
the finalized initial thematic codes are then transferred to Agent Themes for
further processing. The Agent Themes main tasks is to generate themes for
thematic analysis from initial thematic codes provided by Agent Coders. The
process begins by receiving the initial thematic codes from Agent Coders and
organize these codes into preliminary themes, refining them to ensure consis-
tency. After this refinement, the final themes are compiled into a structured
format. These documented themes are then transferred to the final report
for inclusion in the thematic analysis. This structured approach ensures
that thematic codes are systematically organized and refined into meaning-
ful themes that support thematic analysis. The next step is to verify the
generated codes and themes. The Agent Verify received the thematic codes
and themes from Agent Themes. The process begins by initializing the veri-
fication phase, where verification parameters are configured based on quality
standards. The themes and initial codes are then received and loaded for ver-
ification. The next step involves identifying and resolving any inconsistencies
in the themes and codes to ensure accuracy. Once verified, the reviewed data
is compiled into a structured format. The verification process and outcomes
are documented thoroughly. The verified themes and codes are then trans-
ferred to the Agent Finalize for the final action. The Agent Finalize process
starts by receiving the verified themes and codes and configuring the final-
ization parameters based on storage requirements and data formats. The
verified data is then loaded and processed to ensure it matches to the final
output standards and formats. The finalized themes and codes are stored in
the specified data format in the designated storage system. A final report is
then generated, summarizing the themes, codes, and findings. The finaliza-
tion process concludes with the termination of the process, ensuring that all
data is accurately finalized, stored, and documented for future analysis.
    Content analysis is used to analyze media interviews, open-ended sur-
veys, and other forms of text data [73]. Researchers use content analysis to
track changes over time, compare media content, understand the perspec-
tives of different groups, or identify the prevalence of themes or perspectives
in discussions. To automate the process of content analysis, we developed
six AI agents. The Agent Data Preprocessing is the initial step in the au-
tonomous content analysis process. This agent is tasked with summarizing
the story, ensuring it is structured and cleaned for further processing by an-

                                      11
Algorithm 1 Qualitative Data Analysis System with AI Agents
Require: Input data (e.g., project description, links, or audio)
Ensure: Finalized analysis results for each selected type (Thematic, Content, Narrative, Discourse,
    Grounded Theory)
1: Initialize OpenAI API:
2: Set the OpenAI_API_KEY with the appropriate API key.
3: Define the model (e.g., gpt-4o).
4: Prepare for Analysis:
5: Read the input_data from the user (links, prompts, audio).
6: Identify and select analysis types (Thematic, Content, Narrative, Discourse, Grounded Theory).
7: Initialize conversation_history for each selected analysis type.
8: Call Agents for Analysis:
9: for each selected_analysis_type do
10:     if Thematic Analysis is selected then
11:         Call the following agents:
12:         Agent Summary, Agent Coders,
13:         Agent Themes, Agent Verify,
14:         Agent Finalize.
15:     else if Content Analysis is selected then
16:         Call the following agents:
17:         Agent Data Pre-processing, Agent Codebook,
18:         Agent Coding Category, Agent Pattern Recognition,
19:         Agent Verify, Finalize Agent.
20:     else if Narrative Analysis is selected then
21:         Call the following agents:
22:         Agent Data Transcription, Agent Open Coding,
23:         Agent Axial Coding, Agent Selective Code,
24:         Agent Construct Narrative Analysis, Agent Finalize.
25:     else if Grounded Theory is selected then
26:         Call the following agents:
27:         Agent Data Scraper, Agent Coding,
28:         Agent Focused Coding, Agent Theoretical Coding,
29:         Agent Theory Development.
30:     else if Discourse Analysis is selected then
31:         Call the following agents:
32:         Data Transcribed Agent, Agent Themes,
33:         Agent Discourse Analyzer, Agent Contextual Analyzer,
34:         Agent Finalize.
35:     end if
36:     Initialize the conversation history for the selected agent(s).
37:     Call OpenAI API with the agent prompts.
38: end for
39: Agent Interaction:
40: for each round in interaction_rounds do
41:     Agent sends a message.
42:     Process the message to extract analysis results.
43:     Update the conversation history with the agent’s response.
44: end for
45: Return Results:
46: Parse the final agent response.
47: Extract the results for each analysis type.
48: Save Processed Data:
49: if output_type is CSV then
50:     Save results to a CSV file.
51: else if output_type is JSON then
52:     Return response as JSON.
53: end if
54: For audio input, transcribe and process using speech_recognition.

                                                12
other agent. The process start with data collection, where the user uploads
input data from the client side. The preprocessing phase then summarizes
the input data before passing it to the preprocessing module. Next, pre-
processing settings are configured by defining parameters and criteria for
identifying unnecessary words. The data cleaning phase involves identifying
and removing unnecessary words and phrases from the input data. Finally,
the cleaned and structured data is submitted to the Agent Codebook. The
Agent Codebook transforms structured and cleaned data from the preparation
phase into a finalized codebook. The process begins with the identification
of initial codes based on the content of the data. These initial codes are
then compiled into a single document to form the codebook. The next step
involves validating the codebook to ensure consistency and clarity, ensuring
that all codes are well-defined and applicable to the data. After validation,
the codebook is finalized, making it ready for use. The final step is the
transfer of the completed codebook to the Agent Coding Category, making it
available for the coding team to apply in their analysis.

           Table 3: The AI agent workflow to autonomously perform thematic analysis
Algorithm 1 Agent Summary                                 Algorithm 2 Agent Coders                                   Algorithm 3 Agent Themes
Input: Interview, textual data, case studies              Input: Summarized data from Agent Summary                  Input: Initial thematic codes from Agent Coders
Output: Summarized input data and passed to               Output: Initial thematic analysis codes transferred
                                                                                                                     Output: Coherent themes for thematic analysis
Agent coders                                              to Agent Themes
1. Configure Scraper Settings:                            1. Initialize Coding:                                      1. Initialize Theme Generation:
2. scraper_settings ← Configure scraper settings          2. coding_parameters ← Configure coding parameters         2. theme_parameters ← Configure theme generation
based on the discussion structure                         based on thematic requirements                             parameters based on analysis requirements
                                                          3. summarized_data ← Receive and load summarized           3. initial_codes ← Receive and load initial
3. content ← Load and parse the input data pages
                                                          data from Agent Summary                                    thematic codes from Agent Coders
4. Create Summary:                                        4. Generate Initial Codes:                                 4. Organize Codes into Themes:
5. summary ← Create a clear and concise paragraph         5. initial_codes ← Extract and generate initial thematic
                                                                                                                     5. Refine and Consolidate Themes:
summarizing them                                          codes from summarized_data using coding_parameters
6. pass_to_agent_002 ← Compile summaries into             6. review_initial_codes ← Manually review and adjust
                                                                                                                     6. Compile Final Themes:
a structured format                                       the initial codes for accuracy and relevance
                                                          7. compiled_codes ← Compile the reviewed and adjusted
7. End Process                                                                                                       7. Transfer Themes:
                                                          initial codes into a structured format
                                                                                                                     8. send_to_final_report ← Transfer the documented
                                                          8. Transfer Codes:                                         themes for inclusion in the final thematic analysis
                                                                                                                     report
                                                          9. send_to_agent_theme ← Send the compiled initial
                                                                                                                     9. End Process
                                                          thematic codes to Agent Themes for further action
                                                          10. End Process
Algorithm 4 Agent Verify                                  Algorithm 5 Agent Finalize
Input: Themes and initial codes from Agent Themes         Input: Verified themes and codes from Agent Verify
Output: Verified themes and codes stored in a specified
                                                          Output: Finalized themes and codes stored in a specified format
format
1. Initialize Verification:                               1. Initialize Finalization:
2. verification_parameters ← Configure verification
                                                          2. finalization_parameters ← Configure finalization parameters based on storage requirements and data formats
parameters based on quality standards
3. themes_and_codes ← Receive and load themes
                                                          3. verified_data ← Receive and load verified themes and codes from Agent Verify
and initial codes from Agent Themes
4. resolve_discrepancies ← Identify and resolve
any discrepancies or inconsistencies in the themes        4. finalized_data ← Process verified data to ensure it conforms to final output standards and formats
and codes
5. compiled_verified_data ← Compile the verified
                                                          5. Quality Assurance:
and reviewed data into a structured format
6. Document Verification:                                 6. quality_check ← Perform quality assurance check to ensure data integrity and formatting correctness
7. document_verification ← Document the
                                                          7. store_data ← Store the finalized themes and codes in the specified data format in the designated storage system
verification process and outcomes
8. Transfer Verified Data:                                8. Create Report:
9. send_to_finalize_agent ← Transfer the verified
                                                          9. create_final_report ← Generate a final report summarizing the themes, codes, and findings
themes and codes to Finalize Agent for final action
10. End Process                                           10. End Process




                                                                                        13
    The Agent Coding Category organizes and finalizes a categorized code-
book for further use. The workflow begins with the input of a codebook
from the Agent Codebook stage. The first step is to identify code categories
based on the content of the codebook, followed by organizing these codes
into their respective categories (categorized codes). Once categorized, the
agent establishes relationships by describing how different categories relate
to each other. These categorized codes are then compiled into structured doc-
uments (categorized codebook). Finally, the categorized codebook is ready
to be transferred to the Agent Pattern Recognition. Agent Pattern Recogni-
tion convert a categorized codebook into a finalized pattern report for next
agents. Initially, the agent extracts relevant data points from the categorized
codebook. Furthermore, the agent finds initial patterns by extracting codes
and analyze the relationship between the codes. Once these relationships are
determined, the validation phase ensures the accuracy and relevance of the
identified patterns. Detailed descriptions of these relationships and patterns
are then documented. The process concludes with the generation of a detail
pattern report, which provides a structured summary of the findings. The
next step is to validates the pattern report generated by the Pattern Recog-
nition Agent. Initially, the process involves reviewing the pattern report by
documenting any potential issues that arise during the review. Following
this, the agent verifies the identified patterns by cross-referencing them with
the original data to confirm their validity. In the final step, the relationships
identified in the patterns are validated through additional analysis. The pro-
cess concludes with the distribution of a finalized validation report, which
serves as a detail documentation for the next agent. The final step is to
finalizes the validation report. The Agent Finalize reviews the validation
feedback and suggests further refinements. Following this, the agent ensures
the completeness and accuracy of the report by confirming that all data,
patterns, and relationships are correctly represented. In the final step, the
agent compiles and stores all the data in the final report.
    Narrative analysis is a qualitative research method used to analyze
personal stories, to understand how individuals make sense of events and
actions in their lives [74]. To automate the narrative analysis approach, we
developed six AI agents to understand the context and generate the narra-
tive. The process starts with receiving the raw data such as audio recording
or text. The Agent Data Transcription prepares data for transcription by
confirming the quality of the text and audio to ensure data is enough for
transcription. The main task involves transcribing the data, converting the

                                       14
audio into written text. An initial quality check is conducted to remove
unnecessary data and correct any evident transcription errors.
    Upon verification, the transcribed text is compiled into a single document
and then transferred for further processing. The Agent Open Coding receive
the summarized data. The core task involves applying open codes to the
data using inductive coding methods to generate codes directly from the
text. These open codes are then documented to form the basis for a draft
codebook. The agent proceeds by refining these codes, merging similar ones,
and resolving any inconsistencies. This refined set of codes is compiled into an
organized and clearly presented open coding report. Finally, the open coding
report is transferred to Agent Axial coding for further steps in narrative
analysis, completing this phase of the workflow. This structured approach
ensures that raw transcription data is properly coded and documented.
    The Agent Axial Coding begins with the collection of the open coding re-
port generated by the Agent Open Coding. The initial step involves preparing
for axial coding by confirming that the open coding report is properly format-
ted. The agent then identifies code relationships by determining categories
and properties of the codes. Following this, axial codes are developed to
describe the nature of these relationships. The final axial coding report en-
sures that the report clearly presents the axial codes and their relationships.
Once completed, this report is transferred to Agent Selective Code for further
analysis. This structured process enables a detailed understanding of the re-
lationships between codes, which is essential for deeper narrative analysis in
the following steps.
    The Agent Selective Coding main aim is to generate selective code. The
first step is to receive the axial coding report produced by the previous agent.
The initial step is to identify core categories by determining the main cat-
egories from the axial codes. The agent then generates selective codes that
integrate and refine axial codes under these core categories. The process
continues with refining the selective codes by merging similar ones to ensure
clarity and consistency. The refined selective codes and their relationships are
then documented in a selective coding report. Finally, the selective coding
report is transferred for use in next stages of analysis.
    The Agent Construct Narrative Analysis receives the selective coding re-
port produced by the Agent Selective Coding. The initial step involves prepar-
ing for narrative analysis by ensuring the selective coding report is properly
formatted. Following this, the agent identifies key themes by determining the
main themes that emerge from the data. The next step is to construct nar-

                                      15
              Table 4: The AI agent workflow to autonomously perform content analysis
Algorithm 1 Agent Data Preprocessing                          Algorithm 2 Agent Codebook                                     Algorithm 3 Agent Coding Category
Input: User inputs data or uploads data from the client                                                                      Input: Comprehensive codebook from the agent
                                                              Input: Summarized data
side.                                                                                                                        codebook.
                                                                                                                             Output: Finalized categorized codebook for the next
Output: Structured and cleaned data for the next agent.       Output: Finalized codebook for the coding team.
                                                                                                                             agent.
01: Collect Data:                                             01: Define Initial Codes:                                      01: Identify Code Categories:
                                                              02: initial_codes ← Identify initial codes based on the        02: categories ← Identify categories based on codebook
02: User inputs data or uploads data from the client side.
                                                              data content and research objectives.                          content.
                                                                                                                             03: categorized_codes ← Organize codes into their
03: Preprocess Data:                                          03: Compile Codebook:
                                                                                                                             respective categories.
                                                              04: codebook ← Compile initial_codes into a single
04: summarized_data ← Summarize the input data.                                                                              04: Establish Relationships:
                                                              document
05: Pass the summarized data to the preprocessing                                                                            05: relationships ← Describe how different categories
                                                              05: Validate Codebook:
module.                                                                                                                      relate to each other.
06: Configure Preprocessing Settings:                         06: Ensure consistency and clarity in the codebook.            06: Compile Categorized Codebook
07: settings ← Define parameters for data preproce-                                                                          07: categorized_codebook ← Compile categorized_codes
                                                              07: Finalize Codebook:
ssing.                                                                                                                       into structure documents
08: criteria ← Set criteria for identifying unnecessary
                                                              08: Transfere Codebook:                                        08: Validate Categorized Codebook:
words.
                                                                                                                             09: Ensure consistency and clarity in the categorized
09: Clean Data:                                               09: Transfer the codebook to the agent coding category
                                                                                                                             codebook.
10: unnecessary_words ← Identify unnecessary words
                                                              End Process                                                    10: Finalize Categorized Codebook:
and phrases from the input data.
11: cleaned_data ← Remove unnecessary words and
                                                                                                                             11: Transfer Categorized Codebook
phrases
12: Submit to Next Agent:                                                                                                    End Process
13: Pass the structured and cleaned data to the next agent
for coding.
End Process
Algorithm 4 Agent Pattern Recognition                         Algorithm 5 Agent Verify                                       Algorithm 6 Finalize Agent
Input: Categorized codebook from the code categorization                                                                     Input: Validation report from the validation and
                                                              Input: Pattern report from the pattern recognition agent.
agent.                                                                                                                       verification agent.
Output: Finalized pattern report for the next agent.          Output: Finalized validation report for the next agent.        Output: Finalized report for stakeholders and archiving
01: Prepare Data for Analysis:                                01: Review Pattern Report:                                     01: Review Validation Feedback:
02: analysis_data ← Extract relevant data points from the     02: review_notes ← Document any observations or                02: review_notes ← Document any final observations
categorized codebook                                          potential issues during the review.                            or areas needing further refinement.
03: Identify Initial Patterns                                 03: Verify Identified Patterns:                                03: Ensure Completeness and Accuracy:
04: initial_patterns ← Identify frequent co-occurrences and   04: verified_patterns ← Confirm the validity of the patterns   04: completeness_check ← Confirm that all data, patterns,
trends in the codes.                                          through cross-referencing with the original data.              and relationships are correctly represented.
05: Analyze Relationships:                                    05: Validate Relationships:                                    05: Compile Final Report:
06: relationships ← Determine direct and indirect             06: validated_relationships ← Confirm the relationships        06: final_report ← Create a comprehensive and polished
relationships between codes                                   through additional analysis or expert validation.              document ready for dissemination
07: Validate Patterns                                         07: Distribute Validation Report:                              End Process
08: validated_patterns ← Confirm the validity of identified
                                                              End Process
patterns and clusters
09: relationship_documentation ← Create detailed
descriptions of relationships and patterns
10: Generate Pattern Report:
11: pattern_report ← A structured document summarizing
the findings
End Process




rative segments by developing segments that logically flow and build on each
other. The agent then analyzes the relationships and context by describing
how different segments and themes relate to each other. This is followed by
formulating analytical insights that provide a deeper understanding of the
narrative. The process concludes with compiling a narrative analysis report
that ensures the report is organized and clearly presents the analyzed nar-
rative. The Agent Finalize workflow start with receiving the final narrative
report generated by the Agent Construct Narrative Analysis. The initial task
involves reviewing the final narrative report. Following this, the agent con-
ducts a completeness check to ensure that no essential information is missing,
followed by a consistency check to resolve any inconsistencies identified dur-
ing the review. The next steps involve proofreading and editing to enhance
readability and accuracy. Once revisions are complete, the final report is
securely stored in an accessible location.


                                                                                         16
    Ground theory involves in the construction of theories through the me-
thodical gathering and analysis of data [75]. Grounded theory differs from
other qualitative analysis methods as it is not dependent on a pre-existing
theory to guide the direction of the research. It allows the researcher to de-
velop a new theory that is grounded in the data that has been collected. To
autonomously perform a grounded theory approach on our given input data,
we developed five AI agents that work collaboratively to generate theory.

           Table 5: The AI agent workflow to autonomously perform narrative analysis
Algorithm 01: Agent Data Transcription                     Algorithm 02 Agent Open Coding                                 Algorithm 03 Agent Axial Coding
Input: Raw audio or video recordings from various
                                                           Input: Transcript data                                         Input: Open coding report
sources.
Output: Rough transcription compiled into a single         Output: Open coding report for further steps in narrative
                                                                                                                          Output: Axial coding report
document                                                   analysis.
01: Collect Raw Data:                                      01: Collect Rough Transcription:                               01: Collect Open Coding Report
02: Prepare for Transcription:                             02: Initial Review of Transcription                            02: Prepare for Axial Coding
03: preparation_check ← Confirm the quality of the         03: initial_notes ← Document initial thoughts and              03: preparation_check ← Confirm that the open coding
text and audio is adequate for transcription.              observations.                                                  report is properly formatted
04: Transcribe Data:                                       04: Apply Open Codes:                                          04: Identify Code Relationships:
05: transcribed_text ← Convert the audio into written      05: open_codes ← Use inductive coding to generate              05: relationships_identified ← Determine categories,
text.                                                      codes directly                                                 properties, and dimensions of codes
06: Initial Quality Check:                                 06: Document Open Codes                                        06: Develop Axial Codes:
07: quality_check ← Correct any obvious errors or          07: codebook_draft ← Begin compiling a draft codebook          07: axial_codes ← Generate codes that describe the
omissions in the transcription.                            with initial codes                                             nature of relationships
                                                           08: refined_codes ← Merge similar codes, refine definitions,   08: axial_codebook ← Compile a codebook with axial
08: Compile Rough Transcription:
                                                           and resolve any discrepancies.                                 codes
09: rough_transcription ← Compile the transcribed          09: open_coding_report ← Ensure the report is organized and    09: axial_coding_report ← Ensure the report clearly
text into a single document                                clearly presents                                               presents the axial codes and the relationships
10: Transfer Data                                          10: Transfer Open Coding Report                                10: Transfer Axial Coding Report:
11: End Process                                            11: End Process                                                11: End Process
Algorithm 04 Agent Selective Code                          Algorithm 05 Agent Construct Narrative Analysis                Algorithm 06 Agent Finalize
Input: Axial Coding Report                                 Input: Selective coding report                                 Input: Final narrative report
Output: Selective Coding Report                            Output: Construct narrative analysis report                    Output: Finalized narrative report
01: Collect Axial Coding                                   01: Collect Selective Coding Report:                           01: Receive Final Narrative Report
02: Identify Core Categories:                              02: Prepare for Narrative Analysis:                            02: Review Final Narrative Report:
                                                           03: preparation_check ← Confirm that the selective             03: review_notes ← Document any observations or areas
03: core_categories ← Determine the main categories
                                                           coding report is properly formatted                            needing further refinement.
04: selective_codes ← Generate codes that integrate and                                                                   04: completeness_check ← Confirm that no crucial
                                                           04: Identify Key Themes:
refine axial codes under core categories.                                                                                 information is missing.
05: selective_codebook ← Compile a codebook with           05: key_themes ← Determine the main themes that                05: consistency_check ← Address any inconsistencies
selective codes                                            emerge from the data.                                          found during the review.
06: refined_selective_codes ← Merge similar selective
                                                           06: Construct Narrative Segments:                              06: Proofread and Edit:
codes
                                                           07: narrative_segments ← Develop segments that                 07: edited_report ← Make necessary edits to enhance
07: Compile Selective Coding Report:
                                                           logically flow and build on each other.                        readability and accuracy
08: selective_coding_report ← Ensure the report presents                                                                  08: formatted_report ← Ensure the report is visually
                                                           08: Analyze Relationships and Context:
the selective codes and the relationships they describe.                                                                  appealing and professionally presented
                                                           09: contextual_analysis ← Describe how different               09: archive_location ← Store the report in a secure and
09: Transfer Selective Code
                                                           segments and themes relate to each other                       easily accessible location.
                                                           10: analytical_insights ← Formulate insights that
10: End Process                                                                                                           10: End Process
                                                           provide deeper understanding of the narrative
                                                           11: narrative_analysis_report ← Ensure the report is
                                                           organized and clearly presents the analyzed narrative
                                                           12: Transfer Analytic Report
                                                           13: End Process




     The first agent in this process is the Agent Data Scraper. The workflow of
this agent start with the collection of raw data from various sources. The ini-
tial step involves preparing for transcription by identifying and documenting
all sources of raw data. Following this, the agent cleans the data to ensure it
is free from noise and inconsistencies. Once the data is cleaned, it is organized
logically and consistently to form structured data. The next step involves
compiling this cleaned and structured data into a well organized data report.
Finally, the cleaned data report is transferred for further processing to the
Agent Coding. Agent Coding main task is to generate the open coding from

                                                                                      17
given data. These open codes are then organized into broader categories to
form a structured coding scheme. The agent then creates a draft codebook
that includes all identified codes. Once the coding and codebook draft are
finalized, the coding report is then transferred to Agent Focused Coding for
further processing. This structured approach ensures that the cleaned data
is properly coded and organized into meaningful categories. Agent Focused
Coding workflow start with collecting the coding report produced by the
Agent Coding. The initial step involves identifying codes by selecting those
that are most relevant to the topic. Once the codes are identified, the agent
applies focused coding to narrow down the data to its most essential ele-
ments. This process involves creating a codebook specifically for the focused
codes. The focused coding report is then compiled to ensure that it clearly
presents the focused codes. Finally, the focused coding report is transferred
for further analysis to the Agent Theoretical Coding. The Agent Theoreti-
cal Coding main role is to identifying the main theoretical constructs from
the focused codes. Once the theoretical constructs are identified, the agent
generates codes that describe the relationships between these focused codes
and the theoretical constructs. These relationships are then organized into a
structured representation, forming the theoretical framework. A codebook is
compiled specifically for these theoretical codes, and similar theoretical codes
are merged and refined to ensure clarity and consistency. The agent then pre-
pares a theoretical coding report that clearly presents the theoretical codes
and their relationships. Finally, the theoretical coding report is transferred
for further processing by subsequent agents. The Agent Theory Development
first task is to determine the central constructs, referred to as core constructs,
from the theoretical codes. Following this, the agent develops relationships
by defining how these core constructs interact with one another. To validate
the initial theory, the agent uses examples and data segments as support-
ing evidence. These relationships and constructs are then organized into a
theoretical model that clearly illustrates the core constructs and their inter-
actions. The agent compiles all findings into a theory development report
that clearly presents the developed theory.
    Discourse analysis is a qualitative and interpretive method used in
linguistics, social sciences, and anthropology, among other fields, to study
the ways in which language is used in context [76]. Researchers use this
method to analyze the conversation in depth by examining any written or
spoken text. In this approach, we used five agents to autonomously perform
discourse analysis on the provided data.

                                       18
    The Agent Data Transcribed automates the initial stage of discourse anal-
ysis by transforming raw input data, such as spoken conversations, media
content, and online communications, into a structured textual format. The
workflow start by converting audio inputs to text by using speech-to-text
APIs, and text inputs are refined for consistency. The agent then cleans
the data by removing unnecessary elements, correcting errors, and ensuring
terminology consistency. This processed data is summarized and stored in a
structured format, making it ready for further analysis by subsequent agents.

               Table 6: The AI agent workflow to autonomously perform ground theory
Algorithm 01 Agent Data Scraper                             Algorithm 02 Agent Coding                                   Algorithm 03 Agent Focused Coding
Input: Raw data from various sources                        Input: Cleaned data report from the data scraper agent.     Input: Coding report
Output: Cleaned data report compiled and ready for
                                                            Output: Coding report                                       Output: Focused coding report
further processing
01: Collect Raw Data:                                       01: Collect Cleaned Data:                                   01: Collect Coding Report
                                                            02: preparation_check ← Confirm that the cleaned data
02: Prepare for Transcription:                                                                                          02: Identify Significant Codes:
                                                            report properly
03: sources_identified ← Identify and document all                                                                      03: significant_codes ← Select codes that relevant to
                                                            03: Open Coding:
sources of raw data                                                                                                     the topic
                                                            04: open_codes ← Generate codes directly from the
04: Clean Data:                                                                                                         04: Apply Focused Coding:
                                                            data
05: cleaned_data ← Ensure that the data is free from        05: code_categories ← Organize open codes into              05: focused_codes ← Apply focused coding to narrow
noise and inconsistencies.                                  broader categories.                                         down the data to the most essential elements.
06: structured_data ← Ensure the data is organized                                                                      06: focused_codebook ← Create a codebook specifically
                                                            06: codebook_draft ← Create a draft codebook with codes
logically and consistently.                                                                                             for the focused codes.
                                                                                                                        07: focused_coding_report ← Ensure the report clearly
07: Compile Data Report:                                    07: refined_codes ← Merge similar codes and refined it
                                                                                                                        presents the focused codes
08: data_report ← Ensure the report is well-organized                                                                   08: backup_created ← Create a backup of the report and
                                                            08: Save and Backup
and cleaned data.                                                                                                       codebook
                                                            09: backup_created ← Create a backup of the report and
09: backup_created ← Create a backup of the data                                                                        09: Transfer Focused Coding Report:
                                                            codebook
10: Transfer Data                                           10: Transfer Coding Report                                  10: End Process
11: End Process                                             11: End Process
Algorithm 04 Agent Theoretical Coding                       Algorithm 05 Agent Theory Development
Input: Focused coding report                                Input: Theoretical coding report
Output: Theoretical coding report and theoretical
                                                            Output: Theory development report
codebook
01: Collect Focused Coding                                  01: Collect Theoretical Coding Report:
02: Identify Theoretical Constructs:                        02: core_constructs ← Determine the central constructs
03: theoretical_constructs ← Determine the main
                                                            03: Develop Relationships
theoretical constructs
04: theoretical_codes ← Generate codes that describe
                                                            04: construct_relationships ← Define how the core constructs
the relationships between focused codes and theoretical
                                                            interact
constructs
05: theoretical_framework ← Create a structured repre-      05: supporting_evidence ← Use examples and data segments to
sentation of the theoretical constructs                     validate the initial theory
06: theoretical_codebook ← Compile a codebook speci-        06: theoretical_model ← Ensure the model clearly illustrates the core
fically for the theoretical codes.                          constructs and their relationships.
07: refined_theoretical_codes ← Merge similar theoretical   07: theory_development_report ← Ensure the report clearly
codes and refined it                                        presents the developed theory
08: theoretical_coding_report ← Ensure the report clearly   08: backup_created ← Create a backup of the report and model to
presents the theoretical codes                              prevent data loss.
09: Transfer Theoretical Code                               09: End Process
10: End Process




    The Agent Themes automates theme identification in discourse analysis
by processing cleaned and summarized data from the Agent Data Transcribed.
The agent identifies themes by recognizing frequent terms and applying topic
modeling techniques. The identified themes are then refined through a review
process, including merging or splitting themes. Finally, the refined themes
are saved in a structured format and transferred to the Agent Discourse Anal-
yser, ensuring a robust foundation for subsequent discourse analysis stages.
The Agent Discourse Analyser automates the analysis of discourse structure,
organization, and linguistic features by processing themes identified by the

                                                                                        19
Agent Themes. The agent take input data from Agent Themes and ana-
lyzes paragraph organization by identifying topic sentences and supporting
details, and evaluating sentence complexity and variety. The agent identifies
linguistic features such as metaphors, similes, rhetorical devices, and stylistic
elements. Word choice and lexical diversity are also analyzed. The results
of the discourse analysis are stored in a structured format and transferred to
the Agent Contextual Analysis for further processing.

   Table 7: Table:7 The AI agent workflow to autonomously perform discourse analysis
Algorithm 01 Data Transcribed Agent                                 Algorithm 3 Agent Themes                                      Algorithm 3 Agent Discourse Analyser
Input: Spoken conversation, media content, online                   Input: Cleaned and summarized transcribed data from
                                                                                                                                  Input: Identified themes from Agent Themes.
communication, etc.                                                 Agent Transcribed.
                                                                                                                                  Output: Analysis of discourse structure, organization,
Output: Cleaned and summarized transcribed data.                    Output: Identified themes from the datasets.
                                                                                                                                  and linguistic features.
1. Collect Input Data:                                              1. Collect Cleaned Data:                                      1. Collect Thematic Data:
2. Preprocess Data:                                                 2. Preprocess Data for Theme Identification:                  2. Receive identified themes from Agent Themes.
3. extract_audio(audio_or_video_input)                              3. tokenize_text(cleaned_data)                                3. Preprocess Data for Discourse Analysis:
4. transcriptions ← call_speech_to_text_api(audio_data)             4. pos_tagging(cleaned_data) if necessary                     4. Analyze Paragraph Organization:
5. else if input is text-based then                                 5. Identify Themes:                                           5. identify_topic_sentences_and_supporting_details
6. transcriptions ← preprocess_text_data(text_data)                 6. frequent_terms ← identify_frequent_terms                   6. evaluate_sentence_complexity_and_variety(sentences)
7. Clean and Summarize Data:                                        7. potential_themes ← apply_topic_modeling(cleaned_data)      7. Perform Sentiment Analysis:
8. Remove Unnecessary Data:                                         8. Refine Themes:                                             8. sentiments ← use_sentiment_analysis_systems
9. identify_and_remove_filler_words(transcriptions)                 9. review_themes(themes)                                      9. classify_sentiments_at_sentence_and_paragraph_levels
10. remove_irrelevant_sections(transcriptions)                      10. merge_split_themes(themes)                                10. Identify Linguistic Features:
11. correct_transcription_errors(transcriptions)                    11. validate_themes_with_experts(themes) if applicable        11. detect_metaphors_and_similes(sentences)
12. ensure_consistency_in_terminology(transcriptions)               12. merge_split_themes(themes)                                12. identify_rhetorical_devices_and_stylistic_elements
13. Summarize Data:                                                 13. validate_themes_with_experts(themes) if applicable        13. analyze_word_choice_and_lexical_diversity
14. cleaned_summarized_data ← summarize_transcriptions              14. Store Identified Themes:                                  14. Store Analysis Results:
15. save_transcriptions(cleaned_summarized_data, format=                                                                          15. save_analysis_results(discourse_analysis_results,
                                                                    15. save_themes(themes, format="structured_format")
"structured_format")                                                                                                              format="structured_format")
16. Transfer Data to Agent Themes:                                  16. Transfer Data to Agent Discourse Analyser                 16. Transfer Data to Agent Contextual Analyser:
17. End Process                                                     17. End Process                                               17. End Process
Algorithm 4 Agent Contextual Analyser                               Algorithm 05 Agent Finaliser
Input: Analysis of discourse structure.                             Input: Contextual analysis results from Agent Contextual Analyser.
Output: Contextual analysis of the discourse.                       Output: Finalized data ready for reporting or further use.
1. Collect Discourse Analysis Results:                              1. Collect Contextual Analysis Results:
2. Identify Broader Contextual Elements:                            2. ensure_completeness_and_accuracy(contextual_analysis_results)
3. identify_relevant_socio_cultural_factors(discourse_analysis
                                                                    3. validate_coherence_and_consistency(contextual_analysis_results)
_results)
4. Situational Context:                                             4. verify_metadata_and_contextual_information(contextual_analysis_results)
5. assess_immediate_situational_factors(analysis_results)           5. Summarize Final Insights:
6. identify_roles_and_relationships_of_participants(discourse
                                                                    6. compile_key_findings(contextual_analysis_results)
_analysis_results)
7. Integrate Contextual Information:                                7. highlight_important_themes(contextual_analysis_results)
8. merge_contextual_elements_with_discourse_analysis                8. prepare_executive_summaries(contextual_analysis_results)
9. highlight_interplay_between_discourse_and_context                9. Prepare Final Report:
10. Perform Contextual Analysis:                                    10. organize_data_into_report(contextual_analysis_results)
11. analyze_contextual_influence_on_interpretation                  11. include_visual_aids(contextual_analysis_results)
12. identify_context_dependent_meanings_and_implications            12. ensure_report_formatting(contextual_analysis_results)
13. Compile Contextual Analysis Results:                            13. Store Finalized Data and Report:
14. summarize_findings_for_each_contextual_element
                                                                    14. save_finalized_data_and_report(contextual_analysis_results, format="structured_format")
(contextual_analysis_results)
15. present_comprehensive_report_of_contextual_analysis             15. backup_data_and_report(contextual_analysis_results)
16. Store Contextual Analysis Results:                              16. End Process
17. save_contextual_analysis_results(contextual_analysis_results,
format="structured_format")
18. Transfer Data to Agent Finaliser:
19. End Process




    The Agent Contextual Analyser automates the incorporation of contex-
tual elements into discourse analysis. This agent begins by collecting the
results of the discourse analysis and identifying broader contextual elements,
such as socio-cultural factors and situational context. It assesses immediate
situational factors and identifies roles and relationships of participants to in-
tegrate contextual information with the discourse analysis. The agent merges
these elements to highlight the interplay between discourse and context, and
performs a detailed contextual analysis to understand the influence of context
on interpretation, meanings, and implications. The contextual analysis re-

                                                                                           20
sults are compiled, summarized, and presented in a report. These results are
then stored in a structured format and transferred to the Agent Finaliser, en-
suring a thorough understanding of the discourse within its broader context.
The Agent Finaliser is the concluding component in the automated discourse
analysis process. It synthesizes and finalizes the contextual analysis results
provided by the Agent Contextual Analyser. It validates the coherence and
consistency of the results and verifies metadata and contextual information.
The agent then summarizes final insights, highlighting key findings and im-
portant themes, and prepares executive summaries. The finalized data and
report are stored in a structured format.

4. Results
    In this section, we present the study results of the proposed LLM-based
multi-agent system for qualitative data analysis. Below, we present the re-
sults of our LLM-based proposed system in Section 4.1, specifically reporting
the outcomes of RQ1.

4.1. Effectiveness of LLM-based Multi Agent System (RQ1)
     Our proposed LLM-based multi-agent system assist traditional qualita-
tive data analysis. Our goal is to integrate the LLM-based agents into qual-
itative data analysis to process and analyze large, diverse datasets and test
their effectiveness for qualitative data analysis. The results indicate that in-
tegrating LLMs into qualitative research accelerates the analysis process and
improves performance. However, certain limitations remain, emphasizing the
need for further improvements in their application. Below, we have provided
the results of various types of qualitative data analysis.
     The proposed LLM-based multi-agent system has been successfully im-
plemented and tested for autonomous qualitative data analysis. First, we
demonstrate our proposed system’s result for Thematic Analysis.
     As shown in Figure 2, we present a demonstration of our proposed sys-
tem for thematic analysis. As depicted, we input GitHub links and select
thematic analysis to prompt the system to identify issues from the text and
perform thematic analysis. The generated output is then obtained in a CSV
file. The system can handle various input formats. Users can choose their
preferred method of input, allowing for a flexible and user-friendly interac-
tion. Furthermore, we incorporate text extracted from Stack Overflow into
our prompt. Specifically, we opt for thematic analysis to guide the system

                                      21
in identifying the cause from the provided text. As illustrated in Figure
2, the process begins by summarizing the text and identifying the cause.
Subsequently, the system proceeds to generate initial codes, which are then
broken down into subcategories and categories. This time we get final re-
sults in output box. This systematic approach allows for a comprehensive
and structured analysis of the input text. In this project, users have the
autonomy to define and articulate the specific analysis they wish to perform.
This streamlined process allows for efficient and automated exploration of
the underlying concepts and themes within the given data, showcasing the
system’s ability to deliver insightful outcomes without manual intervention.
Our results demonstrate the system’s capability to autonomously execute
qualitative data analysis methods on diverse datasets, streamlining the anal-
ysis process and reducing the need for manual intervention. In our proposed
system, we have implemented an additional feature allowing users to upload
text, document (doc), and Portable Document Format (pdf) files as input.
The system subsequently autonomously generates responses by activating
specific qualitative analysis approaches, thereby facilitating a comprehensive
examination of the provided data. This functionality extends the utility of
our proposed system, making it accessible for practitioners and researchers
alike. Moreover, the system is versatile enough to be employed for interview
analysis, enabling practitioners and researchers to utilize it for conducting
interviews and summarizing the interview text efficiently
    Next, we present the results of the proposed system for Narrative Anal-
ysis. First, we provide the input to our proposed system, which then gener-
ates a narrative analysis. The first step is to summarize the text, followed by
extracting open coding from the summarized data. In this step, the system
breaks down the data into discrete parts. During open coding, the data is
labeled with codes that describe what is happening in the text, aiming to un-
cover key points and their meanings. Second, the system autonomously per-
forms axial coding on the open coding data. Axial coding follows open coding
and involves connecting categories to subcategories, linking them through re-
lationships and patterns. This process helps refine and reorganize the initial
codes into a coherent structure that shows how different concepts interact
with each other. The third step is to autonomously perform selective cod-
ing. In this step, the system identifies the core category that integrates all
other categories. Finally, the proposed system refines the analysis to form
a narrative or theory that best explains the phenomenon under study. By
validating the generated response, we observe that the narrative constructs

                                      22
produced by the proposed system lack creativity and holistic storytelling,
which a human analyst could provide, making the output feel mechanical.



                                                             Chose QDA method, then select
Input Link
                                                              option from the displayed box



                                                                                    Output
                                                                                     File




                                                             Output
                                                              File




                 Figure 2: Generated result by proposed system

    We now present the results of our proposed system for autonomously
performing Content Analysis. First the proposed system initially summa-
rizes the given input dataset and then autonomously generates a codebook
for the summarized data. Next, the system performs coding categorization
based on the initially generated codebook. Finally, the system autonomously
generates pattern recognition based on the created categories. The system
reduces bias in thematic categorization and pattern recognition, providing
an impartial overview of the feedback. On the other hand, the quality of
the generated analysis depends heavily on the clarity and consistency of the
input data. Poorly structured or ambiguous feedback lead to inaccurate or
incomplete insights.
    Discourse Analysis focuses on how language constructs and conveys
meaning in different contexts. Initially, we provided input and then pro-
posed system first transcribed the data and summarized it for further pro-
cessing. The next step was to generate themes based on the summarized
data. Finally, the proposed system performed a discourse analysis based on
the generated themes, helping to understand in detail how these themes are

                                      23
presented, how language is used to shape their meaning and how they res-
onate with different audiences. LLM-based system effectively extracts and
classifies various discourse patterns, such as frustration, satisfaction, fraud,
or negligence. However, there is a strong chance that the system may misin-
terpret context, such as sarcasm, cultural references, or subtle implications,
which a human analyst would recognize.
    Ground Theory involves in the construction of theories through the
analysis of data. The system first summarized the content to highlight essen-
tial information. It then proceeded to perform initial open coding, breaking
down the raw data into meaningful codes that represented various concepts
and patterns. Following this, the system perform focused coding, where it
break down the open codes to focus on the most relevant and essential el-
ements of the data, refining the analysis. After focused coding, the system
moved on to theoretical coding, where it generated relationships between
the focused codes and developed constructs, forming a structured theoreti-
cal concept that connected the central themes identified during the analysis.
Finally, the system produced a theory development report, showing how the
core constructs interacted and validating the theory with supporting evidence
from the dataset.

5. Discussion
    In this paper, we proposed LLM based multi agent system to assist qual-
itative analysis process. The multi-agent system interprets a wide range of
textual and audio data and autonomously performs various types of qualita-
tive data analysis.
    LLM-Based Multi-Agent System for Qualitative Analysis (RQ1):
The results indicate that integrating LLM based multi agents into qualita-
tive analysis is representing a step forward towards automation of big data
analysis. Furthermore, we believe that our findings have several implications
for the future practice of related research methods. Firstly, the implemen-
tation of a multi-agent system that interprets vast quantities of textual and
audio data highlights the potential of AI in enhancing the efficiency of quali-
tative research. Furthermore, our proposed system opens new opportunities
for establishing a new standard in data interpretation and analysis within
both industry and academia. Integrating LLM technology into qualitative
analysis accelerates the data analysis process, reduces the manual effort and
time required for practitioners and researchers to analyze large datasets, and

                                      24
ensures high accuracy. This work has broader implications, particularly for
large-scale industries. Furthermore, it has the potential to reduce the costs
for qualitative studies, as the system is capable of handling complex analyt-
ical tasks independently.
    However, despite these implications, there are still some challenges that
need to be addressed in the future. Firstly, we utilized LLMs to perform
qualitative data analysis. However, regarding data privacy, certain ethical
concerns were raised, particularly related to the potential exposure of sensi-
tive information and the ethical implications of using LLMs for data analysis.
Although we designed specific prompts for each step in qualitative analysis
that effectively generated the output to meet our objectives, it is important
to acknowledge that we cannot claim these prompts to be the most optimal
or accurate. According to Wei et al. [77], there is still a gap in exploring
the potential of prompts to extract better outputs from LLMs. We believe
that improved versions of prompts may lead to better outcomes. Finally,
we only utilized OpenAI API, while many others LLM are available. There-
fore, we cannot guarantee that using other LLMs will achieve comparable
results. Future work could apply this framework to other open-source LLMs,
such as LLaMA [78] and Falcon [79]. However, the computational resources
and cost might be the potential limitations. We also acknowledge that the
proposed system provides autonomous analysis, the use of LLMs poses po-
tential privacy concerns, especially if sensitive qualitative data are processed.
The study did not extensively address data governance or privacy protocols,
which could be a limitation when deploying the system in practice. We also
incorporated a feedback mechanism that enables the system to learn from
user input, allowing for continuous improvement in both performance and
accuracy.
    Our future goal is to involve a more diverse set of participants, including
industrial experts, business analysts, and market researchers from various
fields where qualitative data analysis plays a critical role. We also plan
to utilize benchmarks to broaden the evaluation of our proposed system.
Additionally, investigating the model’s performance in multilingual settings
could broaden its applicability in global research contexts.

6. Conclusions
    In this paper, we introduce an LLM-based multi-agent system designed to
assist various types of qualitative data analysis, including thematic analysis,

                                       25
content analysis, narrative analysis, discourse analysis, and grounded theory.
The main objective is to test the ability of LLM for qualitative data analysis.
The initial results of the proposed system indicate that it autonomously
performs the analysis on the given dataset. However, there is still a need to
highlight the importance of ongoing refinement to address potential areas for
improvement.
    Our future goal is to focus on exploring the system’s performance in multi-
lingual settings to extend its applicability in diverse global research contexts.
Additionally, we will continue to emphasize the importance of maintaining
a feedback loop with domain experts to ensure the ongoing refinement and
enhancement of the system’s capabilities.

7. Acknowledgment
   This project is co-funded by the European Union and Business Finland
under project BF/Amalia-2023/SW.

References
 [1] Xinyi Hou, Yanjie Zhao, Yue Liu, Zhou Yang, Kailong Wang, Li Li,
     Xiapu Luo, David Lo, John Grundy, and Haoyu Wang. Large language
     models for software engineering: A systematic literature review. ACM
     Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, 2023.
 [2] G Bharathi Mohan, R Prasanna Kumar, P Vishal Krishh, A Keerthi-
     nathan, G Lavanya, Meka Kavya Uma Meghana, Sheba Sulthana, and
     Srinath Doss. An analysis of large language models: their impact and
     potential applications. Knowledge and Information Systems, pages 1–24,
     2024.
 [3] Jesse G Meyer, Ryan J Urbanowicz, Patrick CN Martin, Karen
     O’Connor, Ruowang Li, Pei-Chen Peng, Tiffani J Bright, Nicholas
     Tatonetti, Kyoung Jae Won, Graciela Gonzalez-Hernandez, et al. Chat-
     gpt and large language models in academia: opportunities and chal-
     lenges. BioData Mining, 16(1):20, 2023.
 [4] Zhiyu Fan, Xiang Gao, Martin Mirchev, Abhik Roychoudhury, and
     Shin Hwei Tan. Automated repair of programs from large language
     models. In 2023 IEEE/ACM 45th International Conference on Soft-
     ware Engineering (ICSE), pages 1469–1481. IEEE, 2023.

                                       26
 [5] Junjie Wang, Yuchao Huang, Chunyang Chen, Zhe Liu, Song Wang,
     and Qing Wang. Software testing with large language model: Survey,
     landscape, and vision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.07221, 2023.

 [6] Angela Fan, Beliz Gokkaya, Mark Harman, Mitya Lyubarskiy, Shubho
     Sengupta, Shin Yoo, and Jie M Zhang. Large language models for
     software engineering: Survey and open problems. In 2023 IEEE/ACM
     International Conference on Software Engineering: Future of Software
     Engineering (ICSE-FoSE), pages 31–53. IEEE, 2023.

 [7] Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, Ilya Sutskever, et al.
     Improving language understanding by generative pre-training. 2018.

 [8] Yihan Cao, Siyu Li, Yixin Liu, Zhiling Yan, Yutong Dai, Philip S
     Yu, and Lichao Sun. A comprehensive survey of ai-generated content
     (aigc): A history of generative ai from gan to chatgpt. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2303.04226, 2023.

 [9] Sida Peng, Eirini Kalliamvakou, Peter Cihon, and Mert Demirer. The
     impact of ai on developer productivity: Evidence from github copilot.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.06590, 2023.

[10] James Finnie-Ansley, Paul Denny, Brett A Becker, Andrew Luxton-
     Reilly, and James Prather. The robots are coming: Exploring the impli-
     cations of openai codex on introductory programming. In Proceedings
     of the 24th Australasian Computing Education Conference, pages 10–19,
     2022.

[11] Aakash Ahmad, Muhammad Waseem, Peng Liang, Mahdi Fahmideh,
     Mst Shamima Aktar, and Tommi Mikkonen. Towards human-bot col-
     laborative software architecting with chatgpt. In Proceedings of the 27th
     International Conference on Evaluation and Assessment in Software En-
     gineering, pages 279–285, 2023.

[12] Zeeshan Rasheed, Muhammad Waseem, Kai-Kristian Kemell, Wang Xi-
     aofeng, Anh Nguyen Duc, Kari Systä, and Pekka Abrahamsson. Au-
     tonomous agents in software development: A vision paper. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2311.18440, 2023.




                                     27
[13] Ziang Xiao, Xingdi Yuan, Q Vera Liao, Rania Abdelghani, and Pierre-
     Yves Oudeyer. Supporting qualitative analysis with large language mod-
     els: Combining codebook with gpt-3 for deductive coding. In Compan-
     ion Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Intelligent User
     Interfaces, pages 75–78, 2023.

[14] Udo Kuckartz and Stefan Rädiker.       Analyzing qualitative data with
     MAXQDA. Springer, 2019.

[15] AlYahmady Hamed Hilal and Saleh Said Alabri. Using nvivo for data
     analysis in qualitative research. International interdisciplinary journal
     of education, 2(2):181–186, 2013.

[16] Brigitte Smit. Atlas. ti for qualitative data analysis. Perspectives in
     education, 20(3):65–75, 2002.

[17] Michelle Salmona, Eli Lieber, and Dan Kaczynski. Qualitative and mixed
     methods data analysis using Dedoose: A practical approach for research
     across the social sciences. Sage Publications, 2019.

[18] António Pedro Costa, Francislê Neri de Souza, António Moreira, and
     Dayse Neri de Souza. webqda 2.0 versus webqda 3.0: a comparative
     study about usability of qualitative data analysis software. In Devel-
     opments and Advances in Intelligent Systems and Applications, pages
     229–240. Springer, 2018.

[19] Tim Rietz and Alexander Maedche. Cody: An ai-based system to semi-
     automate coding for qualitative research. In Proceedings of the 2021
     CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages 1–14,
     2021.

[20] Robert Chew, John Bollenbacher, Michael Wenger, Jessica Speer, and
     Annice Kim. Llm-assisted content analysis: Using large language models
     to support deductive coding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.14924, 2023.

[21] Maya Grace Torii, Takahito Murakami, and Yoichi Ochiai. Expanding
     horizons in hci research through llm-driven qualitative analysis. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2401.04138, 2024.




                                     28
[22] John Roberts, Max Baker, and Jane Andrew. Artificial intelligence and
     qualitative research: The promise and perils of large language model
     (llm)‘assistance’. Critical Perspectives on Accounting, 99:102722, 2024.

[23] Shih-Chieh Dai, Aiping Xiong, and Lun-Wei Ku. Llm-in-the-loop:
     Leveraging large language model for thematic analysis. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2310.15100, 2023.

[24] Joanna F DeFranco and Phillip A Laplante. A content analysis process
     for qualitative software engineering research. Innovations in Systems
     and Software Engineering, 13:129–141, 2017.

[25] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. Using thematic analysis in psychol-
     ogy. Qualitative research in psychology, 3(2):77–101, 2006.

[26] Nadia N Kellam, Karen Sweeney Gerow, and Joachim Walther. Nar-
     rative analysis in engineering education research: Exploring ways of
     constructing narratives to have resonance with the reader and critical
     research implications. In 2015 ASEE Annual Conference & Exposition,
     pages 26–1184, 2015.

[27] Barney Glaser and Anselm Strauss. Discovery of grounded theory:
     Strategies for qualitative research. Routledge, 2017.

[28] Jonathan Potter. Discourse analysis. Handbook of data analysis, pages
     607–624, 2004.

[29] Yunhe Feng, Sreecharan Vanam, Manasa Cherukupally, Weijian Zheng,
     Meikang Qiu, and Haihua Chen. Investigating code generation perfor-
     mance of chat-gpt with crowdsourcing social data. In Proceedings of
     the 47th IEEE Computer Software and Applications Conference, pages
     1–10, 2023.

[30] Christoph Treude.     Navigating complexity in software engineer-
     ing: A prototype for comparing gpt-n solutions. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2301.12169, 2023.

[31] Jonas Thiergart, Stefan Huber, and Thomas Übellacker. Understanding
     emails and drafting responses–an approach using gpt-3. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2102.03062, 2021.


                                     29
[32] Adam Hörnemalm. Chatgpt as a software development tool: The future
     of development, 2023.

[33] Miltiadis Allamanis, Marc Brockschmidt, and Mahmoud Khademi.
     Learning to represent programs with graphs.     arXiv preprint
     arXiv:1711.00740, 2017.

[34] Jack W Rae, Sebastian Borgeaud, Trevor Cai, Katie Millican, Jor-
     dan Hoffmann, Francis Song, John Aslanides, Sarah Henderson, Roman
     Ring, Susannah Young, et al. Scaling language models: Methods, anal-
     ysis & insights from training gopher. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.11446,
     2021.

[35] Youngjin Chae and Thomas Davidson. Large language models for text
     classification: From zero-shot learning to fine-tuning. Open Science
     Foundation, 2023.

[36] Xiaodong Gu, Hongyu Zhang, and Sunghun Kim. Deep code search. In
     Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Software Engineer-
     ing, pages 933–944, 2018.

[37] Michele Tufano, Dawn Drain, Alexey Svyatkovskiy, Shao Kun Deng,
     and Neel Sundaresan. Unit test case generation with transformers and
     focal context. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.05617, 2020.

[38] Yujia Li, David Choi, Junyoung Chung, Nate Kushman, Julian Schrit-
     twieser, Rémi Leblond, Tom Eccles, James Keeling, Felix Gimeno,
     Agustin Dal Lago, et al. Competition-level code generation with al-
     phacode. Science, 378(6624):1092–1097, 2022.

[39] Federico Quin, Danny Weyns, Matthias Galster, and Camila Costa Silva.
     A/b testing: a systematic literature review. Journal of Systems and
     Software, page 112011, 2024.

[40] Zibin Zheng, Kaiwen Ning, Jiachi Chen, Yanlin Wang, Wenqing Chen,
     Lianghong Guo, and Weicheng Wang. Towards an understanding of
     large language models in software engineering tasks. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2308.11396, 2023.

[41] Zibin Zheng, Kaiwen Ning, Yanlin Wang, Jingwen Zhang, Dewu Zheng,
     Mingxi Ye, and Jiachi Chen. A survey of large language models for

                                    30
    code: Evolution, benchmarking, and future trends.           arXiv preprint
    arXiv:2311.10372, 2023.

[42] Jiho Shin, Clark Tang, Tahmineh Mohati, Maleknaz Nayebi, Song
     Wang, and Hadi Hemmati. Prompt engineering or fine tuning: An
     empirical assessment of large language models in automated software
     engineering tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.10508, 2023.

[43] Youjia Li, Jianjun Shi, and Zheng Zhang. An approach for rapid source
     code development based on chatgpt and prompt engineering. IEEE
     Access, 2024.

[44] Ggaliwango Marvin, Nakayiza Hellen, Daudi Jjingo, and Joyce
     Nakatumba-Nabende. Prompt engineering in large language models. In
     International conference on data intelligence and cognitive informatics,
     pages 387–402. Springer, 2023.

[45] Julia Bailey. First steps in qualitative data analysis: transcribing. Fam-
     ily practice, 25(2):127–131, 2008.

[46] Carolyn B. Seaman. Qualitative methods in empirical studies of software
     engineering. IEEE Transactions on software engineering, 25(4):557–572,
     1999.

[47] Terhi Kilamo, Marko Leppänen, and Tommi Mikkonen. The social devel-
     oper: now, then, and tomorrow. In Proceedings of the 7th International
     Workshop on Social Software Engineering, pages 41–48, 2015.

[48] Yvonne Dittrich, Michael John, Janice Singer, and Bjørnar Tessem. Ed-
     itorial for the special issue on qualitative software engineering research.
     Information and software technology, 49(6):531–539, 2007.

[49] Steve Adolph, Philippe Kruchten, and Wendy Hall. Reconciling perspec-
     tives: A grounded theory of how people manage the process of software
     development. Journal of Systems and Software, 85(6):1269–1286, 2012.

[50] Azizah Ahmad, Rafidah Abd Razak, Mohd Syazwan Abdullah,
     Wan Rozaini Sheik Osman, Abdul Bashah Mat Ali, and Abdul Razak
     Rahmat. Business intelligence model for sustainability of the malaysian
     rural telecenters. Journal of Southeast Asian Research, 2011, 2011.


                                      31
[51] Christopher Exton. The role of content analysis in the development of
     theory and understanding of software engineering. In 12 International
     Workshop on Software Technology and Engineering Practice (STEP’04),
     pages 5–pp. IEEE, 2004.

[52] Aaron Ahuvia. Traditional, interpretive, and reception based content
     analyses: Improving the ability of content analysis to address issues of
     pragmatic and theoretical concern. Social indicators research, 54:139–
     172, 2001.

[53] Martin Cortazzi. Narrative analysis. Language teaching, 27(3):157–170,
     1994.

[54] Chtherine Kohler Rissman. Narrative analysis: Qualitative research
     methods, 1993.

[55] Hsiu-Fang Hsieh and Sarah E Shannon. Three approaches to qualitative
     content analysis. Qualitative health research, 15(9):1277–1288, 2005.

[56] Ji Young Cho and Eun-Hee Lee. Reducing confusion about grounded
     theory and qualitative content analysis: Similarities and differences.
     Qualitative report, 19(32), 2014.

[57] Rosalind Gill. Discourse analysis. Qualitative researching with text,
     image and sound, 1:172–190, 2000.

[58] Zellig S Harris and Zellig S Harris. Discourse analysis. Springer, 1970.

[59] Ellen F Prince. Discourse analysis in the framework of zellig s. harris.
     Current Trends in Textlinguistics, page 191, 1978.

[60] Heinz Steinert. The development of" discipline" according to michel
     foucault: Discourse analysis vs. social history. Crime and Social Justice,
     (20):83–98, 1983.

[61] Norman Fairclough. Discourse and text: Linguistic and intertextual
     analysis within discourse analysis. Discourse & society, 3(2):193–217,
     1992.

[62] Norman Fairclough. Critical discourse analysis. In The Routledge hand-
     book of discourse analysis, pages 9–20. Routledge, 2013.


                                      32
[63] James Thomas and Angela Harden. Methods for the thematic synthesis
     of qualitative research in systematic reviews. BMC medical research
     methodology, 8:1–10, 2008.

[64] Klaas-Jan Stol, Paul Ralph, and Brian Fitzgerald. Grounded theory
     in software engineering research: a critical review and guidelines. In
     Proceedings of the 38th International conference on software engineering,
     pages 120–131, 2016.

[65] Yanyan Li, Casper Shyr, Elizabeth M Borycki, and Andre W Kush-
     niruk. Automated thematic analysis of health information technology
     (hit) related incident reports. Knowledge Management & E-Learning,
     13(4):408, 2021.

[66] Julian Ashwin, Aditya Chhabra, and Vijayendra Rao. Using large lan-
     guage models for qualitative analysis can introduce serious bias. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2309.17147, 2023.

[67] Robert P Lennon, Robbie Fraleigh, Lauren J Van Scoy, Aparna Ke-
     shaviah, Xindi C Hu, Bethany L Snyder, Erin L Miller, William A Calo,
     Aleksandra E Zgierska, and Christopher Griffin. Developing and testing
     an automated qualitative assistant (aqua) to support qualitative analy-
     sis. Family medicine and community health, 9(Suppl 1), 2021.

[68] Aleksei Turobov, Diane Coyle, and Verity Harding. Using chatgpt for
     thematic analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.08828, 2024.

[69] Annette Hoxtell. Automation of qualitative content analysis: A pro-
     posal. In Forum: Qualitative Social Research, volume 20. Freie Univer-
     sität Berlin, 2019.

[70] Megh Marathe and Kentaro Toyama. Semi-automated coding for qual-
     itative research: A user-centered inquiry and initial prototypes. In Pro-
     ceedings of the 2018 CHI conference on human factors in computing
     systems, pages 1–12, 2018.

[71] Petter Törnberg. Chatgpt-4 outperforms experts and crowd workers
     in annotating political twitter messages with zero-shot learning. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2304.06588, 2023.



                                     33
[72] Ashley Castleberry and Amanda Nolen. Thematic analysis of qualitative
     research data: Is it as easy as it sounds? Currents in pharmacy teaching
     and learning, 10(6):807–815, 2018.

[73] James W Drisko and Tina Maschi. Content analysis. Pocket Guide to
     Social Work Re, 2016.

[74] Sarah Earthy and Ann Cronin. Narrative analysis. In Researching social
     life. Sage, 2008.

[75] Julianne S Oktay. Grounded theory. Pocket Guide to Social Work Re,
     2012.

[76] Barbara Johnstone and Jennifer Andrus. Discourse analysis. John Wiley
     & Sons, 2024.

[77] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia,
     Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting
     elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in neural informa-
     tion processing systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022.

[78] Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet,
     Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman
     Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and efficient
     foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.

[79] Ebtesam Almazrouei, Hamza Alobeidli, Abdulaziz Alshamsi, Alessan-
     dro Cappelli, Ruxandra Cojocaru, Merouane Debbah, Etienne Goffinet,
     Daniel Heslow, Julien Launay, Quentin Malartic, et al. Falcon-40b: an
     open large language model with state-of-the-art performance, 2023.




                                     34
