                                         Exploring the Human-LLM Synergy in Advancing
                                         Theory-driven Qualitative Analysis
                                         HAN MENG and YITIAN YANG, Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore,
                                         Singapore
                                         WAYNE FU, Amazon Research, Amazon.com Inc, USA
                                         JUNGUP LEE, Department of Social Work, National University of Singapore, Singapore
                                         YUNAN LI and YI-CHIEH LEE, Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore,




arXiv:2405.05758v2 [cs.HC] 27 Nov 2025
                                         Singapore
                                         Qualitative coding is a demanding yet crucial research method in the field of Human-Computer Interaction
                                         (HCI). While recent studies have shown the capability of large language models (LLMs) to perform qualitative
                                         coding within theoretical frameworks, their potential for collaborative human-LLM discovery and generation
                                         of new insights beyond initial theory remains underexplored. To bridge this gap, we proposed CHALET, a novel
                                         approach that harnesses the power of human-LLM partnership to advance theory-driven qualitative analysis by
                                         facilitating iterative coding, disagreement analysis, and conceptualization of qualitative data. We demonstrated
                                         CHALET’s utility by applying it to the qualitative analysis of conversations related to mental-illness stigma, using
                                         the attribution model as the theoretical framework. Results highlighted the unique contribution of human-
                                         LLM collaboration in uncovering latent themes of stigma across the cognitive, emotional, and behavioral
                                         dimensions. We discuss the methodological implications of the human-LLM collaborative approach to theory-
                                         based qualitative analysis for the HCI community and beyond.
                                         CCS Concepts: • Human-centered computing → Empirical studies in HCI; HCI design and evaluation
                                         methods; • Applied computing → Psychology.
                                         Additional Key Words and Phrases: Qualitative Analysis, Qualitative Coding, Human-LLM Collaboration,
                                         Social Stigma, Mental Health, Attribution Model

                                         1   Introduction
                                         Qualitative coding [2], while commonly used in HCI research [26, 108, 167, 208] to interpret human
                                         behavior [159] as part of the analysis to guide technology development [6], is an arduous process
                                         [146, 213]. The advent of LLMs, such as GPT-41 and Llama [202], offers the potential to support
                                         the qualitative-coding process by performing text analysis, consistently processing language, and
                                         simulating diverse analytical perspectives [144]. In addition, leveraging the consistency of LLMs
                                         may help overcome some of the challenges of qualitative coding, such as replication difficulties
                                         [124] and fatigue-induced human errors [45]. Given these potential benefits, LLMs are increasingly
                                         used to facilitate deductive approaches of qualitative coding [102, 115, 213] in which they can
                                         learn and apply theoretical frameworks2 and the associated human-generated codebooks to code
                                         qualitative data (texts).
                                            Although there has been a growing body of literature that examines the capability of LLMs
                                         in performing theory-driven qualitative coding within existing coding schemes by simulating
                                         human coders [102, 115, 198], their potential to function as a tool to collaborate with human coders
                                         1 https://chatgpt.com/
                                         2 For simplicity, the term ‘theoretical framework’ is used here in a broad sense. For finer distinctions between theoretical

                                         frameworks, theories, and hypotheses, see Muthukrishna & Henrich’s analyses [150].

                                         Authors’ Contact Information: Han Meng, han.meng@u.nus.edu; Yitian Yang, e1498132@u.nus.edu, Department of Computer
                                         Science, National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore; Wayne Fu, wayne_fu@acm.org, Amazon Research,
                                         Amazon.com Inc, USA; Jungup Lee, swklj@nus.edu.sg, Department of Social Work, National University of Singapore,
                                         Singapore, Singapore; Yunan Li, liyunan@u.nus.edu; Yi-Chieh Lee, yclee@nus.edu.sg, Department of Computer Science,
                                         National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.
111:2                                                                                                                                      et al.


                                                                    Qualitative Coding



               I. Data Collection        Human Deductive Coding
                                                                           Human-LLM                    Disagreement
                                                                                                                       Advanced Insights
                                                                           Disagreement                 Analysis
            Theoretical Framework         LLM Deductive Coding

                                             II. Deductive Coding                        III. Inductive Coding




Fig. 1. Overview of the             CHALET approach. In this work, we propose this approach to advance theory-driven
qualitative analysis.


to identify data patterns and extend theoretical constructs beyond the initial coding frameworks
remains largely unexplored. In fact, existing research primarily focuses on replicating human coding
with LLMs, quantifying LLM-human coder agreement [198, 213] to demonstrate LLMs’ potential as
human coder replacements. Yet this emphasis overshadows the value of having LLMs as collaborators.
Specifically, we propose and examine the novel process by which analyzing disagreements between
LLMs and human coders could support collaborative, human-LLM inductive analyses that refine
and enrich the codebook and its use. This represents a fundamental shift in perspective, changing
the view of disagreements from problems to be resolved to opportunities for theoretical discovery.
   We name the proposed approach CHALET (Collaborative Human-LLM AnaLysis for Empowering
Theory-driven qualitative coding). Figure 1 illustrates the major steps in CHALET, in which LLMs
play a critical role: 1) LLM deductive coding, 2) identification of human-LLM coding disagree-
ments, and 3) human-LLM collaborative inductive coding. We assessed our approach with a case
study of the attribution model of mental-illness stigma [48]. This theory, which links causes at-
tributed to behaviors with the stigma of mental illness, connects perceptions of responsibility to
stigma-driven emotions and actions [48]. Emerging concepts such as microaggression [80] and
mental-illness invalidation [82] necessitate a deeper qualitative analysis of the attribution model to
reflect contemporary social-stigma perspectives.
   Our work contributes to the HCI community in several ways. Firstly, we introduced CHALET,
a systematic approach for theory-driven human-LLM collaborative qualitative analysis. In our
case study, we showed how HCI researchers can leverage human-LLM collaboration to derive new
theoretical constructs that neither perspective could achieve independently. Second, we reframed
human-LLM coding disagreement from misalignments to reconcile into an opportunity for
theoretical discovery. Our disagreement analysis reveals how differences between human and
LLM interpretations can expose hidden ambiguity in existing coding schemes and generate fresh
theoretical insights. Finally, based on our observations, we reflected on the practical implications of
future technology-enhanced qualitative research methods and the epistemological considerations,
benefits, and challenges of adopting LLMs in HCI research. We explored how agency is distributed
between humans and LLMs in collaborative settings and discussed broader implications for how
computational HCI approaches can productively engage with interpretive inquiry.

2     Related Work
2.1     The Importance of Qualitative Analysis in HCI
Qualitative analysis is an essential research methodology in various fields, with qualitative coding
being one of its main techniques. Qualitative coding involves categorizing and labeling data to
identify a broad spectrum of patterns, themes, and hypotheses. Deductive coding [70] applies pre-
defined codes derived from existing theories (etic approach), while inductive coding (emic approach)
[91] generates codes from the data itself; hybrid deductive-inductive coding [71] combines both
approaches, starting with pre-defined codes and allowing new codes to emerge from the data
Exploring the Human-LLM Synergy in Advancing Theory-driven Qualitative Analysis                   111:3


concurrently. Qualitative analysis plays a crucial role in understanding intricate human cognition,
behavior, and other psychological constructs, allowing researchers to gain deep insights into the
thoughts, emotions, and motivations that drive human actions [146]. This approach is valuable in
the field of HCI, where understanding the intricacies of digital interaction and user behavior is
essential for designing interfaces and systems [120].
   However, coding, categorizing, and making meaning from qualitative data is inherently chal-
lenging, given its heavy reliance on human understanding and interpretation of conversations,
texts, or behaviors to map onto often complex social and psychological constructs [100]. The recent
proliferation of generative AI technologies [72, 109, 149, 175, 216], natural language processing
(NLP) [137, 153], and LLMs [61] are beginning to show promise in supporting these research
activities by helping researchers consistently read and process data and rapidly generate diverse
analytical viewpoints [180].




2.2   LLM-assisted Text Classification
Building on these capabilities, LLMs have begun to gain traction in various research domains,
including education, sociology, psychology, and other social sciences [55, 165]. Recently, a trend in
research has been to explore the potential of LLMs as textual data annotators [169] and classifiers
[195]. Studies comparing LLMs with human annotators have found that in many tasks [4, 81],
LLMs can reach human expert-level performance [112] even in low-resource scenarios [177],
outperforming traditional pre-trained models while requiring less data [151].
   Specifically, they have outperformed crowdsourced annotations from platforms like Amazon
Mechanical Turk in objective text-classification tasks like relevance determination and topic detec-
tion [95], and surpassed fine-tuned models in automatic genre identification [118] and zero-shot
misinformation labeling [99]. Their capabilities extend to various types of text, helping alleviate
human annotation burden [86] across political content [97], legal documents [13, 164, 182], health-
related posts (e.g., COVID-19 vaccination-related data) [88, 200], and financial news [206]. More
impressively, in social-annotation tasks that require interpreting social norms, cultural context,
language subtleties, and innate human elements (e.g., emotional tones and behavioral indicators),
LLMs continue to show promise [62]. They have performed well in areas challenging even for
humans, such as detecting implicit hate speech [104], stance detection [131], online toxicity [170],
and emotional valence [135]. Previous studies have also demonstrated that LLMs can classify
psychosocial content, including personality traits [7], sentiment [74], suicide tendencies [7], mental
disorders [157], social determinants [168], and propaganda [94], without specialized training.
   Current research has made significant progress in using LLMs for text classification. However,
these efforts take a relatively exploratory approach. Theoretically grounded qualitative analysis,
on the other hand, requires a more rigorous definition and mapping of social and psychological
constructs to linguistic features and labels. These mappings can be difficult even for human coders,
who often require considerable training before they can consistently perform the tasks. Existing
studies that prioritize conceptualization-agnostic classifications risk underutilizing the data’s
innate theoretical value and complex intrinsic patterns. Furthermore, emphasizing classification
performance and end-state results while neglecting the interpretive process may limit insights
into how, when, and why these theoretical constructs develop [31], potentially diminishing the
overall theoretical contribution of the research. To remedy this situation, qualitative coding [120] is
well-poised to compensate for the lack of theoretical groundwork and in-depth analysis.
111:4                                                                                           et al.


2.3     Qualitative Coding with Technology Support
2.3.1 LLM-supported Deductive Coding. When performing theory-driven deductive coding, human
coders typically adhere to a holistic codebook to ensure that the coding is aligned with the pre-
defined characteristics or constructed concepts being applied [198]. Manual methods of deductive
coding, such as iterating between refining the codebook and applying codes to the data, present
scalability challenges when working with large datasets, where maintaining coding consistency
becomes increasingly difficult as coder fatigue and careless errors may accumulate [209]. Accord-
ingly, technological advances have ushered in a variety of methods to support deductive coding
and content analysis [43, 72, 109], including rule/dictionary-based approaches [50, 153], machine
learning [149, 174], and NLP [87]. For instance, supervised learning approaches, such as SVM, have
been utilized to analyze leadership behaviors [129].
   The advent of LLMs has further promised efficiency and consistency by allowing the analysis
of a larger, more diverse array of datasets and the detection of language patterns. Several studies
[63, 115, 198, 213] have reported fair to substantial agreement between human experts and LLMs
when using expert-developed codebooks. The LLM-assisted approach has been applied to mul-
tiple theoretical frameworks [16, 27], such as Schwartz’s theory of human values [184] and the
Theoretical Domains Framework [36]. Specifically, LLMs have demonstrated their versatility in
various analytical contexts, handling children’s speech [213], historical media representations [63],
business communication [158], and technology usage patterns [115]. Applications in the field of
education have been particularly fruitful, with researchers applying LLMs to classify discourse in
collaborative learning environments [188], assess literary analysis skills [221], and code students’
knowledge-building processes [102]. Moreover, Hou et al. [102] found that prompt-engineering
techniques can further improve agreement between human expert-coded and LLM-coded data.
   While these studies have evaluated LLMs’ proficiency to code in alignment with humans, less
emphasis has been placed on the factors that lead to coder disagreement. Traditionally, analyzing
the reasons for these disagreements is crucial [218] to generate theoretical insights by facilitating
collaborative data reinterpretation and allowing human coders to reconsider the assigned codes.
Only a few studies [40, 219] have recognized the value of understanding and utilizing such dis-
agreement to refine the codebook accordingly. Results from these studies not only suggested that
analysis of disagreement could clarify code definitions but also hinted that LLMs have the potential
to work in tandem with human researchers [147]. This kind of human-LLM collaboration can be
beneficial in several ways, such as by helping human researchers discover, define, and conceptualize
new constructs. To further explore this understudied area, we propose an approach that leverages
the systematic analyses of human-LLM disagreements to derive new theoretical insights through
collaborative qualitative coding.
2.3.2 LLM-supported Inductive Coding. Inductive coding is a bottom-up method by which re-
searchers interpret raw text-based data to identify patterns and construct ideas, independent of
pre-existing conceptualizations or hypotheses [30]. Initially, the inductive coding process involved
manually finding observations in the data, deriving patterns, forming hypotheses, and finally
conceptualizing the phenomenon [173]. Subsequently, several computer-assisted methods have
emerged to facilitate inductive coding for researchers [78, 124, 152], including platforms such as
Atlas.ti [181], MaxQDA3 , nVivo4 , and nCoder [219]. In addition, various AI/NLP-based techniques
[98, 101, 109] have been developed to aid in this process. For example, unsupervised machine
learning methods, such as topic modeling [14, 24, 64, 101, 125] and clustering algorithms (e.g.,

3 https://www.maxqda.com
4 https://lumivero.com/products/nvivo/nvivo-product-tour/
Exploring the Human-LLM Synergy in Advancing Theory-driven Qualitative Analysis                 111:5


𝑘-means [153] and HDBSCAN [161]), have been applied to help code social concepts like inequality
in news coverage.
   The emergence of LLMs has further shown promise as a viable approach alongside conventional
AI/NLP approaches [75, 148, 190, 217]. When evaluated against human-led coding on identical
datasets, LLMs demonstrated comparable performance in inferring most of the key themes [18,
75, 140, 162]. LLMs can support most steps of such an inductive process, from generating initial
codes [77, 119, 220] and searching for themes [1, 61, 121] to reviewing and defining those themes
[51, 53, 113]. Specifically, in the initial coding phase, LLMs excel at generating descriptive codes
[33] and offering on-demand code suggestions [76]. For theme identification, they can cluster
responses [107, 189, 204] and extract essential commonalities from codes [121]. During the review
and definition stages, LLMs help refine codes [132] and critique codebooks [113, 155]. For instance,
Deiner et al. [54] showcased the LLM’s ability to code health-related corpora inductively.
   While studies show that LLMs can help suggest codes and themes from qualitative data, such as
interview transcripts, their utility may be limited with large datasets. Previous approaches involved
feeding large volumes of data directly into LLMs, without a structured methodology, which might
be constrained by LLMs’ input length limitations [53]. In such situations, human researchers may
be unable to make full use of LLMs or may encounter higher technical barriers when working with
these models. In addition, previous studies have primarily focused on distinguishing relatively overt
topics [148], but identifying inner attributions, tacit knowledge, and socio-psychological constructs
requires a deeper level of social awareness, which presents a more challenging undertaking that has
not been extensively explored. Thus, our paper explores new ways of human-LLM collaboration to
help address both the data-quantity burden and the increased analytical complexity of interpreting
such intricate social issues.

2.3.3 Hybrid Deductive/Inductive Coding Approach. The hybrid approach [29, 89, 166, 197, 215]
integrates deductive coding using a priori templates with inductive coding that allows new themes
to emerge from the data. This method begins with the development of a codebook based on
theoretical frameworks, which is then applied to the text to identify meaningful units. As coding
progresses, coders assign inductive codes to data units describing new themes observed in the data,
expanding or separating from pre-determined codes. Through iterative analysis, codes are linked
to discover patterns, with themes clustered and assigned succinct phrases to capture underlying
meanings, ultimately leading to a conceptualization grounded in both theory and raw data [28, 71].
This method is an indispensable and integral part of theory-driven qualitative analysis.
   Although LLMs have been used tentatively in deductive and inductive coding, their use in the
hybrid coding approach remains largely underexplored. To date, no research has incorporated
LLMs or other AI techniques into the process of hybrid qualitative analysis. This gap highlights the
need for further exploration to address this unknown, as it may lead to overlooking the full scope
of human-LLM collaboration in facilitating theory-driven concept induction and extension. Our
research aims to address this gap by introducing a partnered human-LLM approach that provides
LLM assistance in a hybrid manner, merging deductive and inductive coding. This contribution
enhances technology-supported qualitative analysis.

3   CHALET: Collaborative Human-LLM AnaLysis for Empowering Theory-driven
    Qualitative Coding
  CHALET is a hybrid qualitative coding approach that leverages the co-action between humans and
LLMs. Figure 2 shows its major components. Specifically, CHALET has three major steps, and within
these steps, there are three key tasks (T1, T2, and T3) that highlight the uniqueness of human-LLM
collaboration. Below is an overview of these steps and their associated key tasks:
111:6                                                                                                                                                                         et al.


                  I. Data Collection                                              II. Deductive Coding                                      III. Inductive Coding

  a. Theoretical Framework
                                                                                                : Probably. Before I retired, I was
                                                                                                                                            Stigmatizing (patronization)
     Cognitive                   Emotional                                                 CEO of a small consulting company. I
     Judgments                   Responses                                                 never had an employee like Avery
                                                                           Codebook        but did have a couple of "less than
        Responsibility                  Fear                                               eagerly ambitious" employees who           Hypothesis: apparently kind,
                                                                                           occasionally needed encouragement.         hierarchical sense, a feeling of
        Dangerousness                   Pity                                               I saw working with them to get their       superiority
                                                      Human Coders          Message        best effort as part of my job.
        Controllability                 Anger
                                                                                                                                      Pattern: By default, individuals with
                                                      Human Deductive Coding                              Stigmatizing (helping)      mental illness are seen as
                                                                                                                                      occupying lower positions in the
            Behavioral Responses
                                                                                                                                      workplace, while individuals
             Avoidance            Helping                                                                                             without such conditions are seen as
                                                     LLM Deductive Coding (T1)                               Non-stigmatizing         being in higher positions.
                 Coercive Segregation
                                                    Iteratively find optimal prompt from
                                                                   codebook                                                           Observation: The default supposed
                                                                                                                                      relationship is that he/she is CEO
  b. Human-chatbot Conversation                       Please help code                                         Human error?
                                                                                                                                      and Avery is an employee.
                                                      the message ...                                          LLM error?
        If you were Avery’s colleagues, are you                                                                Or… both?
        willing to help them with work projects?                            Codebook
                                                      Prompt                                                  Open Discussion
                                   Maybe not, …
                                                        LLM
        I see. What potential result do you think      Coder                 Message         Human-LLM Disagreement (T2)                Disagreement Analysis (T3)
        this might have on your work?




Fig. 2. The     CHALET systematic approach: a case study on mental-illness stigma. I. Data Collection:
(a) Theoretical Framework. The attribution model [48] is selected as the theoretical underpinning. This
model covers concepts of responsibility, dangerousness, controllability (i.e., cognitive judgments), fear, pity,
anger (i.e., emotional responses), avoidance, helping, and coercive segregation (i.e., behavioral responses).
(b) Human-chatbot Conversation. Qualitative data is collected interactively from participants through
chatbot-posed questions that align with the theoretical model. For example, participants are queried about
their willingness to assist people with mental illness (corresponding to the helping code). II. Human-LLM
Synergistic Deductive Coding. Human coders use the attribution model to develop a codebook and code
the response as Stigmatizing. This codebook is then learned by LLMs (T1), which, in contrast, code the same
response as Non-stigmatizing. III. Collaborative Inductive Coding. Disagreements between human coders
and LLMs (T2) inform further qualitative analysis, revealing a perceived CEO-employee relationship and an
underlying assumption of a hierarchical social structure. This is hypothesized to indicate a sense of superiority,
resulting in the final coding of Stigmatizing (patronization) (T3).



    (1) Data collection based on theoretical framework. In the first step, a theoretical framework
        is selected by researchers to guide the analysis. Qualitative data is then collected under
        certain conditions designed to align with this framework.
    (2) Human-LLM synergistic deductive coding. In the second step, humans and LLMs perform
        synergistic deductive coding of the data. A codebook is usually developed by human coders
        to analyze the data qualitatively. Then, the LLMs learn from the human coders using
        various aspects of the codebook, such as code definitions and/or keywords, as well as the
        human-coded data. In this step, there are two key tasks (T1, T2):
           • T1: Instruct LLMs to consistently apply the human-established codebook in deductive
             coding by identifying a prompt design that generates output closely aligned with
             human coders, thus avoiding unnecessary, biased discordance analysis.
           • T2: Identify and categorize key mismatches between coding done by humans and LLMs,
             determining whether each represents a coding error or signals a potential new code.
    (3) Collaborative inductive coding. In the third step, disagreements between human coders
        and LLMs are analyzed and conceptualized. The conceptualization, through human-LLM
        collaborative coding, may lead to the emergence of new codes and (sub-)themes. In this
        step, one key task (T3) is:
Exploring the Human-LLM Synergy in Advancing Theory-driven Qualitative Analysis                                     111:7


            • T3: Reconcile human-LLM coding disagreements through human-LLM collaborative
              coding to develop novel theoretical constructs and generate qualitative insights.
  To illustrate our approach and highlight LLMs’ roles, we present in Figure 2 (and throughout the
paper) a case study of qualitative-data analysis grounded in the attribution model – a theoretical
model of mental-illness stigma [48]. Human coders and LLMs perform deductive data coding to
determine if a participant’s message is considered stigmatizing and, if so, how it can be coded into
one of these categories based on the attribution model (T1). Codes from human coders and LLMs are
compared, and disagreements will be identified (T2). These disagreements are used for collaborative
inductive coding (T3), in which humans and LLMs work together to derive new stigma-related
themes/codes and enhance the qualitative-analysis process. We will describe each step and task in
detail next.

3.1    Data Collection
As foundational models, LLMs require domain-specific data to make accurate inferences [32]. This
characteristic makes targeted data collection essential for developing agentic LLMs that can support
effective human-AI collaboration. Our first step is to collect rich qualitative data from participants
using methods such as interviews, focus groups, and human-chatbot interactions [10], as this
crucial step influences and shapes the subsequent analysis and results. A key principle of our
approach is that each question designed to elicit responses from participants should be carefully
curated to correspond to a specific construct or concept within the chosen theoretical framework,
facilitating theory-driven qualitative analysis that generates structured, theoretically relevant data.

3.2    Human-LLM Synergistic Deductive Coding
After data collection, we conduct human deductive coding to develop a codebook. We subsequently
devise a method to transform the human-generated codebook into a set of instructions that could
be provided to the LLM, with the goal of improving the LLM’s ability to perform deductive coding
more accurately and in closer alignment with human coders. In particular, this step entails both
human and LLM coders coding the same set of messages, paving the way for in-depth comparison,
further analysis of their coding results, and collaboration between human and LLM coders.

3.2.1 Human Deductive Coding. Initially, human coders engage in theory-informed deductive coding
[179] of the collected data using the theoretical framework. The process begins by identifying key
concepts from the theoretical framework and developing a preliminary codebook to maximize
inter-rater reliability 5 [44] and coding coherence. The codebook typically includes code names,
definitions, qualifiers, exclusions [70], and examples [154], serving as a guide throughout the coding
process [30]. Human coders then code subsets of data and set checkpoints, allowing the codebook to
evolve iteratively until satisfactory inter-rater reliability is achieved [120]. Following prior practices
[42, 210], at least two coders participate in both the initial codebook development and its iterative
refinement. The coders resolve disagreements at each checkpoint through open discussion with
the main researcher. Whenever they need domain expertise to resolve any disagreement, they may
consult a domain specialist. After a sufficient amount of data has been coded, a stratified sampling
re-check mechanism is used to enhance coding consistency and maintain the reliability of the
coding process.

5While we use inter-rater reliability to verify that our codebook can be applied consistently in a deductive manner,

we recognize that optimizing for higher inter-rater reliability is not always appropriate for qualitative research in HCI,
particularly in inductive or interpretivist work [141].
111:8                                                                                              et al.


3.2.2 LLM Deductive Coding (T1). To instruct the LLM to code, we need to guide LLMs such that
they are capable of dissecting the texts and constructs in ways that conform to the theoretical
framework. To this end, the codebook, curated and finalized during the human deductive coding
process, serves as a valuable resource for this guidance. Unlike previous work that either focuses
on general text classification [4, 81] without theoretical grounding or shows that LLMs can perform
deductive coding using relatively simple, ad-hoc prompts [63, 115, 198, 213], we conduct a guided
exploration of prompt design based on the human-produced codebook. With this focus, under-
standing the effects of different prompts provided to LLMs [213] on discrepancies with humans
is crucial to our approach. The main reason is that we want to find prompts that elicit deductive
coding outputs from LLMs that most closely match those produced by well-trained human coders.
Given that we do not know, a priori, which prompts are best for LLMs to perform deductive coding,
our exploration of prompt design can provide useful information to contextualize the performance
of LLMs in such complex socio-cognitive tasks. Results will also better align LLMs with those of
humans before we identify their disagreements in the next step.
   To this end, we propose to first systematically investigate the effect of incorporating various
codebook components, such as code definitions, keywords, coding rules, and examples, into the
LLM instructions. Next, we explore whether providing additional components beyond the codebook
enhances human-LLM coding agreement. This exploration guides us to evaluate combinations of
codebook-derived components and supplementary details to assemble prompts that yield better
LLM coding results. We also fine-tune the model configurations, textual structures, output formats
(with or without short justifications for assigned codes), and output strategies (single output
vs. majority voting from multiple outputs) to improve human-LLM agreement and enhance the
interpretability of the results.
   Once the inter-rater reliability between human and LLM coding has reached a reasonably high
level, we proceed to code the remaining parts of the dataset not coded by humans using the LLM.
This is followed by a sampling of these newly LLM-coded, previously human-uncoded data to verify
that the consistency between human and LLM coding is maintained [11] in order to create a validated
dataset. This LLM-based procedure not only facilitates human-LLM disagreement identification in
our approach but can generally increase our confidence that the LLMs are performing at a level
comparable to trained human coders. In situations in which it is important to reduce human effort
in large-scale qualitative analyses, this step can be done iteratively to validate how well the model is
capable of performing (most of) the coding, potentially alleviating the workload of manual coding
methods.

3.2.3 Human-LLM Disagreement Analysis (T2). Disagreement analysis [218] is essential for our
methodology. Instead of merely aiming to minimize the human-LLM disagreements [40, 219], our
approach seeks to benefit from them. Specifically, we show how these discrepancies can be used to
identify areas in which theoretical constructs require improvement, thereby enriching the coding
schemes.
   Upon completion of both human and LLM deductive coding, each message in a subset of the data
is associated with a human-assigned code, along with multiple LLM-generated codes produced
using different prompts. We then identify a subset of messages for the disagreement analysis. While
there are different ways to determine the selection criterion, for the purpose of demonstrating
the general validity of our approach, we decided to adopt a relatively conservative criterion – we
only selected messages in which the LLM-generated codes from all prompt variants differ from the
human-assigned code for the same message. In other words, any message with at least one LLM
code matching the human code was excluded from the disagreement discussion. Generally, a more
conservative criterion will lead to a smaller subset of messages (i.e., less effort), while relaxing the
Exploring the Human-LLM Synergy in Advancing Theory-driven Qualitative Analysis                    111:9


criterion may lead to more messages for further analysis (i.e., more effort but potentially more
improvement). We provided a detailed discussion of disagreement-selection criteria and their
implications in Section 5.2.2.
   Subsequently, all human coders independently review these human-LLM disagreement and
engage in open discussion to understand in what way they can provide information for further
qualitative analysis. All coders are required to decide whether each human-LLM disagreement
belongs to one of the following categories:
      • Human Coding Error: During human deductive coding, coders made incorrect decisions.
      • LLM Coding Error: Alternatively, the disagreement may stem from LLM limitations in
        interpreting context or nuance, leading to difficulties in coding certain messages, particularly
        those with complex or implicit patterns.
      • New Code: It is also plausible that both humans and LLMs have erred; the human-LLM
        disagreement signals a novel concept that has not been accounted for in the current coding
        scheme.
  If, after open discussion, the coders identify potential new codes, they will initiate a systematic
induction to generate and conceptualize new concepts therein and to form umbrella themes through
collaborative analysis with the LLMs.

3.3   Collaborative Inductive Coding (T3)
We reconcile LLM-human coding disagreements through inductive coding, where human coders
and LLMs work in tandem to develop new codes and capture the content of disputed messages.
Building upon manual hybrid coding [29, 89, 166, 197, 215], this step facilitates the conceptualization
of qualitative data by leveraging human expertise in socio-psychological understanding and LLMs’
capabilities to rapidly generate code suggestions from messages and synthesize theme proposals
from codes [53]. We involve three human coders to facilitate triangulation and follow a two-cycle
coding procedure [179]: first for descriptive capture, followed by theoretical formation.
   To align with previous practices [108, 212], three coders first independently review the messages
involved in the human-LLM discrepancies. They jot down notable observations and recurring
patterns, listing each interesting disagreement in a spreadsheet, along with relevant excerpts and
their initial interpretations. These individual spreadsheets are then merged for collective review. In
open discussions, coders share their observations about the commonalities among the disagreement
messages, progressively evolving their understanding. When a new pattern is identified that goes
beyond the original coding scheme, coders work together, aided by LLM suggestions, to assign a
preliminary new code name to capture this emerging concept. This iterative process continues
until all messages with human-LLM coding discrepancies have been reviewed. Subsequently,
coders revisit and revise these new codes, collapsing the initial codes into fewer, more analytic
constructs. Further discussion and affinity diagramming [93] are conducted to synthesize these
concepts, organize them into sub-themes, and develop overarching themes to elucidate LLM-human
discordance. These newly discovered (sub-)themes and their associated codes offer fresh insights
that enrich our understanding of the social construct under study.
   In the next section, we will present a case study that illustrates how we applied this method.
We aim to show that analyzing disagreements between humans and LLMs could offer distinct
advantages. To preview our results, we found that LLMs, trained on a broad spectrum of global
knowledge and characterized by their semantic-driven, rule-abiding nature, can help human coders
think outside the box, identify controversial gray areas that may be overlooked or variably classified
due to subjectivity, and consistently apply coding rules, potentially introducing new analytical
views into the theory-driven qualitative analysis process.
111:10                                                                                                                           et al.


           ①      Small Talk                       ③。   Question Answering
                                                                                                     Follow-up Questions
               How was your mood today?            If you were Avery’s colleagues, are you
                                                   willing to help them with work projects?          Encourage participants to
                                     Fairly good                                                     express more about their
                                                                                         Maybe not   thoughts.

           ②      Vignette                         I see. What potential result do you think
                                                   this might have on your work?                       Active Listening
             When Avery is working on their
             company projects, their work                                                                   Skills
             performance has declined…                              I might have to do extra work.     Restate and validate
                                                                                                       what participants
                                         I see…    Totally got it! Covering for Avery means            have said.
                                                   extra hours for the team. That's rough.
             They enrolled in online courses
             for interest but later gave up as
                                                   For me, to be honest, I would                         Neutral Self-
             the excitement faded…                                                                        Disclosure
                                                   consider…
                                                                                                        Self-disclosure with
                                                                                                        neutral opinion.




Fig. 3. Conversation flow design. The conversation comprises three main components: small talk, vignette
delivery, and question answering. In the question-answering phase, follow-up questions are used to
gather additional information [90]; active-listening skills are implemented to engage participants [214];
neutral self-disclosure is applied to facilitate mutual disclosure [123] while maintaining neutrality.


4   Case Study: Advancing Theory-driven Qualitative Analysis of Mental-illness Stigma
4.1 Data Collection
To demonstrate how to collect theory-informed qualitative data for CHALET in practice, we decided
to use human-chatbot conversations, as AI chatbots have proven effective for qualitative-data
collection [5, 10, 38, 66] by promoting self-disclosure [123] through techniques like gamification
and humanization [172, 199] that transform survey questions into interactive communications,
offering a middle ground between scalability and depth. Here, however, we do not claim that CHALET
is inherently constrained by the specific choices made in our case study, including data source and
collection method, domain, theoretical framework, participant demographics, or language; rather,
it should potentially extend to other data types and fields where data collection is guided by social
theories, though such extensions would require future empirical validation. Data collection for the
case study ran between November 2023 and February 2024.
4.1.1 Human-chatbot Conversation Design. We designed our chatbot, Nova, with a gender-neutral
name and avatar. The conversation began with a small-talk session to build rapport. Next, Nova
delivered a vignette about Avery’s experience with mental illness, specifically major depressive
disorder, over several messages, intermittently prompting participants for brief responses. After
the vignette, Nova posed open-ended questions inviting participants to share their own feelings and
opinions. These core questions, which assessed stigmatizing attitudes toward mental illness, were
interspersed with a strategically placed mid-session break to re-engage participants with lighthearted
dialogue about hobbies and to alleviate potential emotional distress. Three strategies were designed
into the chatbot to facilitate participants’ self-disclosure: follow-up questions, active-listening skills,
and neutral self-disclosure (see Figure 3 and Supplementary Materials for details).
  Vignette Design. Vignettes [130], which are brief, evocative stories, are effective tools for eliciting
opinions and attitudes toward people with mental illness in chatbot-mediated social contact [114,
122, 185], as they provide detailed stimuli that may resonate with participants’ experiences [139],
while avoiding excessive emotionally charged situations [84]. We designed a vignette based on the
DSM-5 [12], which focused on Avery, a person experiencing depressive symptoms. The vignette
Exploring the Human-LLM Synergy in Advancing Theory-driven Qualitative Analysis                          111:11


                                    Table 1. The chatbot question scripts.

 Question Scripts                                                                      Attribution Types
 As mentioned in the story, Avery is facing difficulties in their relationships with   Responsibility
 colleagues and their work performance. Do you think Avery’s current situation is
 primarily a result of their actions? Please share your thoughts.
 Let’s say you were one of Avery’s friends at the party or other social event. Would   Anger
 you feel anger toward them because of their actions, like losing their temper and
 yelling at someone?
 I’d like to know – would you feel concern and sympathy for Avery’s mental             Pity
 state?
 If you were to travel or engage in activities with Avery, would you have any feel- Fear
 ings of fear or threat regarding the potential consequences of your interaction?
 I wonder if you were one of Avery’s colleagues or friends, then would you be          Helping
 inclined to help them with tasks such as work projects?
 Aside from being a colleague or a friend, I’m also curious, if you’re Avery’s         Coercive Segregation
 neighbor, would you think it’s better to separate them from the neighborhood
 and have them hospitalized for treatment?
 If you were in the process of selecting a tenant for your home, would you feel        Social Distance
 comfortable entrusting it to someone like Avery?


described Avery’s symptoms without technical or medical jargon and did not explicitly specify
Avery’s gender or age. It illustrated how the symptoms negatively affected Avery’s life, including
work, relationships, family, and social interactions with strangers. We avoided including more
extreme symptoms such as self-injurious behavior or suicidal ideation for ethical considerations.
    Conversation-question Design. The chatbot questions presented in Table 1 were adapted from
the original attribution model [48] and the Attribution Questionnaire-27 (AQ-27) [9, 47], which
was developed based on the attribution model and operationalized concepts into measurable items
(i.e., blame, fear, pity, anger, helping, avoidance, coercion, segregation, and dangerousness). Following
the practice of Lee et al. [122], we combined coercion-segregation and fear-dangerousness pairs to
create a more concise conversation flow and designed seven chatbot questions corresponding to the
attributions of responsibility, fear, pity, anger, helping, social distance (i.e., avoidance), and coercive
segregation. All materials that emanated from the chatbot were reviewed and refined by a specialist
(one of the co-authors with expertise in mental health) and a professional psychiatrist. To foster self-
disclosure and reduce social desirability bias, we embedded questions in vivid, relatable scenarios
using relatively indirect phrasing [73]. We also formulated one to two follow-up questions for
each question, taking advantage of LLMs’ strong eloquence and flexibility, to probe for underlying
reasons, potential outcomes, or specific triggering scenarios.
4.1.2 Participants and Procedure. We amassed participants from diverse backgrounds in Western
countries, mostly the United States and the United Kingdom, through two online platforms, Prolific
and Qualtrics. During recruitment, we clearly outlined the study’s general scope and duration, and
participants’ right to withdraw at any point. Our inclusion criteria regulated that all participants
must 1) be at least 21 years old, 2) speak English as their first language, 3) be willing to read material
related to mental illness, and 4) have no immediate or urgent mental-health concerns. The last
criterion is incorporated because of the potential risk that vignettes about mental illness could
111:12                                                                                             et al.


Table 2. Participant Characteristics. Mental illness experience refers to whether participants had close
friends or family members affected by mental illness.

                                                                             ALL (N=1,002) n (%)
                               Yes                                                  526 (52.5)
 Mental Illness Experience     No                                                   299 (29.84)
                               Maybe                                                177 (17.66)
                               21-24                                                 70 (6.99)
                               25-34                                                234 (23.35)
                               35-44                                                211 (21.06)
 Age                           45-54                                                155 (15.47)
                               55-64                                                131 (13.07)
                               65+                                                  201 (20.06)
                               Male                                                 540 (53.89)
                               Female                                               460 (45.91)
 Gender                        Prefer not to say                                      1 (0.1)
                               Prefer to self-describe: Trans Man                     1 (0.1)
                               White                                                695 (69.36)
                               Black or African American                            210 (20.96)
                               Asian                                                 47 (4.69)
 Ethnicity                     Mixed                                                 26 (2.59)
                               American Indian or Alaska Native                       6 (0.6)
                               Other (Hispanic, Chicano, etc.)                       18 (1.8)
                               Less than primary                                      2 (0.2)
                               Primary                                               24 (2.4)
                               Some secondary                                        14 (1.4)
                               Secondary                                            139 (13.87)
 Education                     Vocational or similar                                104 (10.38)
                               Some college but no degree                           190 (18.96)
                               University – Bachelor’s degree                       328 (32.73)
                               Graduate or professional degree (MA, MS,
                                                                                    197 (19.66)
                               MBA, PhD, law degree, medical degree, etc.)
                               Prefer not to say                                      4 (0.4)




cause distress to individuals grappling with such issues [176]. We recruited 1,002 participants, none
of whom reported having an ongoing mental illness. We used IP addresses to filter out duplicate
participants. The participants were relatively balanced in terms of gender (53.89% male, 45.91%
female) and featured a broad age distribution, with the largest age groups being 25-34 (23.35%) and
35-44 (21.06%). Approximately half (52.5%) had friends or family affected by mental illness. Detailed
participant characteristics are presented in Table 2.
   This one-time study took about 30 minutes to complete, and participants were paid approximately
US$6.30 for their time. We first obtained participants’ consent and informed them that their data
would remain confidential. Participants were forewarned that the study would involve a scenario
related to mental illness and were given the option to withdraw if they felt uncomfortable. Next,
participants were asked basic demographic questions. Participants then engaged in the human-
chatbot conversation for approximately 20 minutes. A post-study debriefing explained the research
Exploring the Human-LLM Synergy in Advancing Theory-driven Qualitative Analysis                      111:13


objective of assessing stigma attitudes and informed participants about common types of mental-
illness stigma.
4.1.3 Quality of Collected Data. In total, we collected 7,014 messages, with each participant
providing seven messages corresponding to the seven attributions under study. We measured the
duration of the human-chatbot conversations and the word counts of the participants’ contributions
to them, with the former averaging 𝑡 = 17.63 minutes (𝑆𝐷 = 8.18). The mean word counts per
participant message, broken down by attribution, were 43.82 for responsibility (𝑆𝐷 = 14.68), 43.40
for social distance (𝑆𝐷 = 15.49), 41.50 for helping (𝑆𝐷 = 14.20), 40.86 for anger (𝑆𝐷 = 13.45), 40.18
for coercive segregation (𝑆𝐷 = 13.70), 39.74 for fear (𝑆𝐷 = 14.14), and 39.30 for pity (𝑆𝐷 = 13.98).
Our human coding of 4,200 messages from the first 600 participants showed that only 47 (1.12%)
were excluded due to being excessively brief (<5 words), incomplete, or off-topic. Word-frequency
analysis further demonstrated that the collected messages were generally on-task, with high-
frequency words closely aligned with their respective attributions – for instance, “hospitalization"
and “treatment" dominated messages about coercive segregation, “threatened" and “frightened" were
prominent in fear-related messages, and “support" appeared frequently in helping-related messages.

4.2   Human-LLM Synergistic Deductive Coding
4.2.1 Human Deductive Coding. The attribution model [48] informed the human deductive-coding
process of our case study. To clarify the terminology used in this paper: codes are labels that assign
symbolic meaning to each message. Attributions are concepts derived from the attribution model
[48], including responsibility, social distance, fear, anger, coercive segregation, helping, and pity. Each
code is generated to represent one of these attributions or as non-stigmatizing if it does not match
any of the stigma-related attributions. Three coders were recruited from the research team (two
female and one male), two of whom had computer science backgrounds and one of whom specialized
in the social sciences. Each had previous experience with qualitative coding. Notably, we set the
number and backgrounds of the human coders, the intervals at which agreement is checked, and
the coding scheme as examples rather than fixed prerequisites of the CHALET framework; instead,
we document these choices to illustrate how CHALET allows human coders to develop a coherent
understanding of their data and theoretical constructs and produce a well-written codebook to
instruct the LLM.
   Procedure. We started with pilot coding, followed by formal coding with ongoing inter-rater
reliability checks [179]. First, as a pilot phase, two coders coded 70 messages (10 for each attribution)
based on the attribution model [48], discussed the coded messages and disagreements, and created
an initial codebook.
   The coders then proceeded to formal coding, in which a third coder was trained by the initial
two coders. They randomly selected 700 messages from 100 participants, which two coders inde-
pendently coded through frequent checkpoints: after coding 10 participants (Cohen’s 𝜅 = 0.55),
then another 10 participants (Cohen’s 𝜅 = 0.53), followed by four sets of 20 participants each
(Cohen’s 𝜅 = 0.66, 0.79, 0.76, and 0.72, respectively). At each checkpoint, the coders discussed
coding decisions and rationales to resolve discrepancies, added empirically derived coding rules &
specifications, revised definitions, and assigned keywords for each code. The versioned codebook
evolution is available in Supplementary Materials.
   Once achieving satisfactory inter-rater reliability (Cohen’s 𝜅 > 0.6 [120]), the coders stabilized
the codebook and set up longer checkpoints for minor refinements: coding of 50 participants
(Cohen’s 𝜅 = 0.74), then another 50 participants (Cohen’s 𝜅 = 0.66), followed by 100 participants
(Cohen’s 𝜅 = 0.69), and two sets of 150 participants each (Cohen’s 𝜅 = 0.69 and 0.66, respectively).
After completing coding of 4,200 messages from 600 participants, coders verified coding consistency
111:14                                                                                                                       et al.




Fig. 4. Distribution of human-assigned codes across seven attributions, where each message was coded as
Stigmatizing, Non-stigmatizing, or Stigmatizing (others). Codes were assigned through iterative deductive
coding with inter-rater reliability checks (Cohen’s 𝜅 > 0.6), following the procedures described in Section 4.2.1.
See Supplementary Materials for the complete codebook.


through stratified sampling, recoding 50 messages from the first 700 coded messages, 40 from the
next 1,400 messages, and 10 from the final 2,100 messages. Upon completion, the coders consulted
with the specialist to resolve any remaining disagreements, outputting both the human-generated
codes and a developed codebook (see Supplementary Materials).
   Results. The derived coding scheme comprised eight codes: seven stigma-related codes (i.e.,
responsibility, social distance, fear, anger, coercive segregation, helping, and pity) and one non-
stigmatizing code.
   Figure 4 shows the distribution of codes generated by human coders6 . Of the total 4,153 human-
coded messages, 46.01% (𝑛 =1,911) contain stigmatizing attitudes. Among the stigmatizing codes,
responsibility was the most prevalent, accounting for 9.53% (𝑛 = 395) of all codes. Social distance
followed closely with 9.15% (𝑛 = 379), and fear made up 8.86% (𝑛 = 367) of the total codes. Anger and
coercive segregation constituted 7.19% (𝑛 = 298) and 6.57% (𝑛 = 272) of the codes, respectively. The
least common stigmatizing codes were helping with 3.81% (𝑛 = 158) and pity with 1.01% (𝑛 = 42).
Table 4 presents example messages for each stigmatizing code. For non-stigmatizing messages, one
example came from P383, who strongly opposed coercive segregation and found hospitalization
suggestions offensive:
        “No, I think that is a deeply offensive and appalling suggestion. I think that is a strange
         question to ask. The real question is what right would anyone have to take her Avery
         away or hospitalise her against her will? She is harming no one." (P383)
   We calculated inter-rater reliability (Cohen’s 𝜅) for each attribution to verify our codebook’s clar-
ity. Five attributions showed relatively high inter-rater reliability (Cohen’s 𝜅 ≈ 0.70): responsibility
(0.71), anger (0.75), fear (0.69), coercive segregation (0.71), and social distance (0.70). Helping (0.56)
and pity (0.36) showed lower inter-rater reliability, possibly due to their limited occurrence in the
collected data – only 158 out of 594 instances for Stigmatizing (helping) and 88 out of 592 for Stig-
matizing (pity) – preventing human coders from fully developing reflexive understanding between
stigmatizing and non-stigmatizing attitudes. The overall agreement was satisfactory (Cohen’s
𝜅 = 0.71) [120], and recheck coding yielded Cohen’s 𝜅 of 0.69. Throughout the human deductive
6 For each message, human coders considered the specific attribution question (e.g., responsibility) in Table 1 that elicited

the message and then categorized it into one of three codes: 1) Stigmatizing for that specific attribution (e.g., Stigmatizing
(responsibility)), 2) Non-stigmatizing, or 3) Stigmatizing (others) if the message showed stigma but related to other attributions.
We consider this three-way classification potentially easier than having human coders select from all eight possible codes at
once.
Exploring the Human-LLM Synergy in Advancing Theory-driven Qualitative Analysis                  111:15


coding, we output a list of code definitions, keywords, coding rules & specifications, and example
messages for LLMs to learn from.
4.2.2 LLM Deductive Coding (T1). To instantiate CHALET’s T1, in our case study, we explored
and evaluated 23 prompt variants to instruct LLMs to apply the human-established codebook,
maximize LLM-human agreement (as measured by comparing LLM-generated codes to existing
human-assigned codes on 4,200 messages, represented by Cohen’s 𝜅), and reduce disagreement
potentially caused by less-tuned LLM interpretations.
   T1 Procedure. We systematically assess and operate two key elements of prompt design: compo-
nents inside the codebook and components not covered by the codebook.
   Which components of the codebook substantially impact LLM-human coding agree-
ment? The human-written codebook consists of several components for each code: a code name,
several keywords, coding rules & specifications, and one example. We investigated whether these
codebook components, along with other materials previously provided to human coders (i.e., the
vignette as background knowledge, questions from Table 1, and participants’ messages), improved
LLM-human agreement or caused potential information overload that reduced it. Thus, we system-
atically steered the presence or absence of each component in the prompts and compared their
effect on human-LLM coder agreement (Cohen’s 𝜅).
   Furthermore, we compared LLM-human agreement under two distinct prompt scenarios: “target-
code" and “all-code" prompts [63]. In the target-code scenario, the LLM was presented with seven
separate tasks, one for each stigma attribution. For each task, the LLM was provided with codebook
components for only the target-stigma code and the Non-stigmatizing code and was asked to classify
each message into one of three codes: the target-stigma code, Non-stigmatizing, and Stigmatizing
(others) for all other-stigma codes. In the all-code scenario, the LLM completed a single task in which
it was given codebook components for all seven stigma codes and the Non-stigmatizing code and was
required to classify the messages into one of these eight categories. The reason for this comparison
is to test whether familiarity with the full codebook, especially the coding rules and examples of
non-target codes, improves the LLM’s performance in matching human coding decisions on the
target code. For example, when coding one stigma attribution (e.g., responsibility), the LLM might
only need to know how the codebook defines stigmatizing and non-stigmatizing cases of that
attribution, with responses that fit neither definition automatically coded as Stigmatizing (others).
   Beyond the codebook, what additional components might influence LLM-human agree-
ment? To avoid limiting our exploration to codebook components alone, and inspired by research
showing the benefits of in-context learning in language processing tasks [58], we first investigated
the effect of adding more human-coded examples to the prompt. These examples were carefully
selected by human coders from existing human-coded messages. In addition, research has shown
that the order of examples in prompts can affect LLM performance [133]. Hence, we studied the
impact of example order by adjusting the sequence of examples for three codes (i.e., Stigmatizing,
Non-stigmatizing, and Stigmatizing (others)) under the condition of having only target-code code-
book components, as exhaustive permutation testing would be computationally expensive for all
eight codes in the all-code scenario. Finally, given the general effectiveness of the chain-of-thought
prompting strategy [211], which breaks down complex reasoning tasks into sequential smaller
steps, we explored whether incorporating explicit reasoning (e.g., “The view that those with mental
illness should change their perspective and consider others suggests self-help ability and personal
responsibility.”) would improve LLM’s consistency with human coding.
   We used gpt-4-1106-preview for all analyses. Our prompt design and model parameters en-
coded insights from prior practices [63, 96, 103, 171, 205, 223], alongside our own empirical explo-
rations (detailed in Supplementary Materials), which included temperature setting tests (1, 0.5, and
111:16                                                                                                et al.


0), LLM reasoning output for coding decisions, and majority voting with multiple LLM outputs
(5 outputs). We selected the following configuration: a temperature setting of 0, a role-playing
approach in which the LLM was instructed to assume the role of “a competent coder for mental-illness
stigma," a textual structure with instructions (e.g., codebook components) preceding content (e.g.,
the messages to be coded), and requesting the LLM to provide reasoning for its generated codes.
We opted to forgo adopting majority voting. Figure 6 in Appendix B shows our prompt structure.
   This process improves LLMs’ coding capabilities, enables them to assist in deductive coding, and
allows subsequent disagreement analysis to more likely reflect genuine perspectival differences
rather than instructional inadequacies. Using the prompt with the highest LLM-human agreement,
we had LLMs code previously human-uncoded messages to reduce human effort. Given that prior
research has shown that LLMs may introduce biases into qualitative coding, such as over-predicting
certain codes due to training-data preconceptions [11], we randomly selected 25 messages (6.25%
of the human-uncoded messages) from each code for human review.

   T1 Results. Although the specific findings about which prompt variants yield higher agreement
are particular to this case study, our results can provide practical guidance on how CHALET as a
methodological framework can help researchers effectively utilize LLMs in deductive coding, such
as improving the consistency between human and LLM coders and understanding the general
patterns and tendencies of LLMs when they deviate from human coders.
   Components inside the codebook: Inclusion of the full codebook improved human-LLM
coding consistency, with different components showing varying effects. We present the
results in Figure 5 and Appendix A’s Table 5. First, by comparing the provision of only target-code
components with including components from all codes, we found that the latter approach improves
the consistency between LLM and human coding – for instance, Cohen’s 𝜅 rose from 0.60 to 0.75
when providing all codebook components for all codes. This suggested that components from
other codes actually help LLM learn holistically rather than act as noise, enabling it to differentiate
multiple attributions at a level comparable to human coders.
   Second, we incrementally added the presence of different codebook components in the prompts
and observed changes in LLM-human coding consistency. We conducted this analysis using target-
code prompts, with similar trends observed for all-code prompts. Overall, adding vignettes, key-
words, and examples yielded small improvements to consistency, with Cohen’s 𝜅 increasing by
0.02 (0.28 to 0.30), 0.01 (0.58 to 0.59), and 0.01 (0.59 to 0.60), respectively. The inclusion of coding
rules substantially increased consistency, driving Cohen’s 𝜅 up by 0.28 (0.30 to 0.58) (see Table 5).
Compared to keywords and examples, rules helped define the intension and extension of each code
in a more explicit, structured, and logical manner, which presumably enabled LLM to reason about
text semantics in a way similar to how human coders use them to make consistent judgments.
   To illustrate this, P388 stated, “I will feel a bit angry because I want all guests to have a good time,
but I try to make people understand Avery’s behavior. They need help and should be empathized with."
The human coders unanimously coded this message as Stigmatizing (anger). Without rules, the
LLM coded it as Non-stigmatizing, focusing on the empathetic aspects of the message. Yet, when
provided with coding rules, the LLM correctly coded it as Stigmatizing (anger), recognizing that
expressions of anger, even if mild, take precedence when coding stigma. Here, the coding rules
helped the LLM distinguish between intension (i.e., feelings of anger) and extension (i.e., attempts
at understanding) in the participant’s message and prioritized the former, much like human coders
do.
   Specifically, for each attribution, the vignettes increased consistency slightly, e.g., with Cohen’s 𝜅
increased by 0.02 for responsibility (0.61 to 0.63) and by 0.03 for fear (0.58 to 0.61). In the same vein,
keywords and examples yielded small gains in consistency of 0.01 to 0.04 – exemplified by anger,
Exploring the Human-LLM Synergy in Advancing Theory-driven Qualitative Analysis                 111:17


where Cohen’s 𝜅 improved from 0.51 to 0.52 with keywords and further increased to 0.54 with
an example. Rules proved to be most impactful, particularly for codes with low initial agreement,
such as helping (0.01 to 0.58) and pity (0.12 to 0.44). For helping, the LLM, for example, correctly
coded P365’s statement “I probably would help her but only if I knew she was seeking some type
of medical help" as stigmatizing, following the coding rule that conditional assistance based on
treatment-seeking behavior reflects stigma.
   Interestingly, in the case of pity, for instance, the LLM interpreted P437’s statement “I feel
emotional and compassionate toward her" as subtly stigmatizing without coding rules, reasoning
that viewing Avery’s situation as deserving of sympathy, though well-intentioned, could constitute
an unintentional form of stigma. This LLM insight, despite lowering consistency, 1) stimulated a
unique analytical perspective for examining pity, 2) intrigued us to deliberate how expressions of
pity might inadvertently convey condescension, superiority, and patronization, and 3) potentially
mitigated our one-sidedness by challenging our preconceived notion of pity as purely positive, a
view also supported by the theory [48], thus sparking us to conceptualize a new form of implicit
stigma in the later disagreement analysis.
   Components not covered by the codebook: The inclusion of additional components
beyond the codebook minimally affected LLM-human coding consistency. Figure 5 and
Appendix A’s Table 6 compare the LLM-human consistency between prompts using only the
codebook and those using additional components. In general, adding human-reasoning processes,
more examples, and varied example orders showed minimal effect on LLM-human consistency,
with the overall Cohen’s 𝜅 difference ranging from -0.01 to 0.03 across all settings. This might
be attributed to several factors, such as the applicability and specificity of the supplementary
context, its compatibility with the existing codebook, or the LLM’s performance ceiling based on
the codebook alone.
   For attributions such as anger, fear, coercive segregation, and social distance, more examples
slightly bolstered consistency, with Cohen’s 𝜅 increasing by up to 0.13 as shown in Table 6, likely
because LLM could better code messages with strong similarities to these examples. Conversely,
for helping, adding more examples led to lower coding consistency, as Cohen’s 𝜅 dropped by 0.09
to 0.18, potentially due to input overload complicating the model’s task. For pity and responsibility,
Cohen’s 𝜅 fluctuated inconsistently (-0.10 to 0.05 and -0.03 to 0.06 respectively) when examples
were added in different orders or reasoning text was included.
   The effect of the example order also varied. Specifically, the Stigmatizing_Non-stigmatizing_Stigmatizing
(others) (𝑆_𝑁 𝑆_𝑂) order without CoT increased Cohen’s 𝜅 by 0.09 for anger and decreased it by 0.09
for helping; similarly, the 𝑁 𝑆_𝑆_𝑂 order with CoT showed changes in Cohen’s 𝜅 with improvements
for anger (0.08) and social distance (0.03), but a decline for responsibility (-0.02). Overall, while
our explorations provided a preliminary illustration of how different prompt designs can affect
LLM-human consistency in deductive coding, future larger-scale studies are needed to carefully
investigate why these variations affect each code differently, and how LLMs should be optimally
configured for these coding tasks.
   Beyond Cohen’s 𝜅, we explored how example order affects the frequency distribution of LLM-
generated codes. We quantified how often each code (i.e., Stigmatizing, Non-stigmatizing, and
Stigmatizing (others)) was assigned by the LLM when placed in different positions within the
target-code prompts. The results reveal that codes positioned at the beginning appeared more
frequently in LLM outputs. Across all codes, presenting the Stigmatizing code first resulted in
an average of 1,418.75 Stigmatizing codes, compared to 1,310.25 when presented second, and
1,254.25 when presented last. A chi-square test further confirmed that these differences in code
frequencies when Stigmatizing, Non-stigmatizing, or Stigmatizing (others) was presented first in the
prompt were statistically significant (𝜒 2 (4, 𝑁 = 4,153) = 85.04, 𝑝 < .001) and not due to chance. We
111:18                                                                                                                                                                                                                     et al.

               All-code Info        Target-code Info    +CoT S_NS_O S_O_NS NS_S_O NS_O_S O_S_NS O_NS_S                  All-code Info               Target-code Info        +CoT S_NS_O S_O_NS NS_S_O NS_O_S O_S_NS O_NS_S
0.8                                                                                                      0.8
0.7                                                                                                      0.7
0.6                                                                                                      0.6
0.5                                                                                                      0.5
0.4                                                                                                      0.4
0.3                                                                                                      0.3
0.2                                                                                                      0.2
0.1                                                                                                      0.1
0.0                                                                                                      0.0
0.1                                                                                                      0.1
0.2                                                          CoT                                         0.2
              +vig           word    +vig       word
      name
                                                           NoCo T                                                                     word                          word
                                                                                                               name   +vig   +rule           name   +vig   +rule            +CoT
                                                                                                                                                                                     CoT         T       CoT     T       CoT     T
                             +exp              +exp          CoT
                                                           NoCo T
                                                                                                                                                                                                NoCo            NoCo            NoCo
             +rule                  +rule                    CoT
                                                           NoCo T                                                                                                                  NoCo                NoCo            NoCo
                            name               +CoT          CoT
                                                           NoCo
                                                             CoTT                                                                     +exp                          +exp                T                   T               T
                        +key                 +key
                                                           NoCo
                                                                                                                                     +key                          +key
                                                             CoT
                                                           NoCo T
                                                                T                                                                                                                    CoT                 CoT             CoT



                                         (a) Responsibility                                                                                                               (b) Anger
               All-code Info        Target-code Info    +CoT S_NS_O S_O_NS NS_S_O NS_O_S O_S_NS O_NS_S                  All-code Info               Target-code Info        +CoT S_NS_O S_O_NS NS_S_O NS_O_S O_S_NS O_NS_S
0.8                                                                                                      0.8
0.7                                                                                                      0.7
0.6                                                                                                      0.6
0.5                                                                                                      0.5
0.4                                                                                                      0.4
0.3                                                                                                      0.3
0.2                                                                                                      0.2
0.1                                                                                                      0.1
0.0                                                                                                      0.0
0.1                                                                                                      0.1
0.2                                                                                                      0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                   CoT
                                                                                                                                                                                               T
                                                                                                               name   +vig   +rule   +key           +vig       +rule
                                                             CoT
      name   +vig   +rule
                             word    +vig       word       NoCo                                                                                                                             CoT
                                                                T                                                                        word                                             NoCo T
                                                                                                                                                                                         NoCo
                             +exp              +exp          CoT
                                                           NoCo
                                                             CoTT                                                                                          +key                             CoT
                                                                                                                                                                                          NoCo T
                            name    +rule      +CoT        NoCo
                                                             CoT
                                                           NoCo T
                                                                T                                                                        +exp                  word                         CoT
                                                                                                                                                                                          NoCo
                                                                                                                                                                                            CoTT
                                                             CoT                                                                                               +exp                       NoCo
                        +key                 +key
                                                           NoCo
                                                             CoTT                                                                                                                           CoT
                                                                                                                                                                                          NoCo T
                                                           NoCo T                                                                       name                  +CoT                             T


                                                       (c) Pity                                                                                                           (d) Fear
               All-code Info        Target-code Info    +CoT S_NS_O S_O_NS NS_S_O NS_O_S O_S_NS O_NS_S                  All-code Info               Target-code Info        +CoT S_NS_O S_O_NS NS_S_O NS_O_S O_S_NS O_NS_S
0.8                                                                                                      0.8
0.7                                                                                                      0.7
0.6                                                                                                      0.6
0.5                                                                                                      0.5
0.4                                                                                                      0.4
0.3                                                                                                      0.3
0.2                                                                                                      0.2
0.1                                                                                                      0.1
0.0                                                                                                      0.0
0.1                                                                                                      0.1
0.2                                                                                                      0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                   CoT
                                                                                                                                                                                         NoCo
                                                                                                               name   +vig   +rule
                                                                                                                                       word         +vig       +rule
                                                             CoT
      name   +vig   +rule
                             word    +vig       word       NoCo
                                                             CoTT                                                                                                                            T
                                                                                                                                                                                           CoT
                                                                                                                                                                                         NoCoT
                             +exp   +rule      +exp        NoCo
                                                             CoT
                                                           NoCo T
                                                                T                                                                      +exp                +key word
                                                                                                                                                                                           CoT
                                                                                                                                                                                         NoCoT
                                                                                                                                                                                           CoT
                            name               +CoT          CoT
                                                           NoCo
                                                             CoTT                                                                     name                                               NoCoT
                                                                                                                                                                                           CoT
                        +key                 +key                                                                                    +key                      +exp
                                                           NoCo
                                                             CoT
                                                           NoCo T
                                                                T                                                                                                                        NoCoT
                                                                                                                                                                                           CoT
                                                                                                                                                                                         NoCoT
                                                                                                                                                              +CoT


                                                 (e) Helping                                                                                   (f) Coercive Segregation
               All-code Info        Target-code Info    +CoT S_NS_O S_O_NS NS_S_O NS_O_S O_S_NS O_NS_S                  All-code Info               Target-code Info        +CoT S_NS_O S_O_NS NS_S_O NS_O_S O_S_NS O_NS_S
0.8                                                                                                      0.8
0.7                                                                                                      0.7
0.6                                                                                                      0.6
0.5                                                                                                      0.5
0.4                                                                                                      0.4
0.3                                                                                                      0.3
0.2                                                                                                      0.2
0.1                                                                                                      0.1
0.0                                                                                                      0.0
0.1                                                                                                      0.1
0.2                                                          CoT                                         0.2
      name   +vig   +rule
                             word    +vig       word
                                                                                                                             +rule                         +rule                   CoT
                                                                                                                                                                                               T
                                                                                                               name   +vig             word         +vig             word
                                                           NoCoT
                                                             CoT                                                                                                                            CoT
                                                                                                                                                                                          NoCo T
                                                                                                                                                                                         NoCo
                             +exp   +rule      +exp        NoCoT
                                                             CoT
                                                           NoCoT
                                                             CoT                                                                       +exp                         +exp                    CoT
                                                                                                                                                                                          NoCo
                                                                                                                                                                                            CoTT
                            name               +CoT        NoCoT
                                                             CoT                                                                      name                          +CoT                  NoCo
                                                                                                                                                                                            CoTT
                        +key                 +key                                                                                    +key                      +key
                                                           NoCoT
                                                             CoT
                                                           NoCoT                                                                                                                          NoCo
                                                                                                                                                                                            CoT
                                                                                                                                                                                          NoCo T
                                                                                                                                                                                               T


                                       (g) Social Distance                                                                                                                (h) Total

Fig. 5. Cohen’s 𝜅 between LLM-generated and human-assigned codes under different prompts. The 𝑥-
axis shows 23 prompts with different codebook-component combinations. We assign aliases 𝐿1-𝐿23 to
these prompts from left to right for brevity. (a)-(g) represents the LLM-human coding consistency for each
attribution using prompts with varying codebook components. (h) displays the aggregated Cohen’s 𝜅 across
all attributions. All-code info refers to prompts that provide the same amount of codebook components
for all codes, while target-code info indicates that the prompt only provides codebook components for
the corresponding attribution, with other attributions coded collectively as Stigmatizing (others). name: code
name only; +vig: added vignette; +rule: added rules; +keyword: added keywords; +exp: added example. CoT:
chain-of-thought; NoCoT: no chain-of-thought. S: Stigmatizing; NS: Non-stigmatizing; O: Stigmatizing (others).
S_NS_O denotes the order of the three examples as Stigmatizing, Non-stigmatizing, and Stigmatizing (others).
The other notations similarly indicate other permutations. Error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals for
Cohen’s 𝜅 estimates across varying prompt conditions. The result highlighted in red represents the one with
components that fully match the human-written codebook, albeit in a different format. Prompt configurations
were systematically varied to test codebook component effects on LLM-human agreement; detailed prompt
templates and design rationale are provided in Supplementary Materials.
Exploring the Human-LLM Synergy in Advancing Theory-driven Qualitative Analysis                  111:19


discussed the implications of the observed primacy effect when using LLMs for qualitative coding
in Supplementary Materials.
   By consolidating all the aforementioned findings, we identified the highest agreement (Cohen’s
𝜅) between humans and LLMs for each attribution: responsibility (0.69), anger (0.65), pity (0.50),
fear (0.71), helping (0.69), coercive segregation (0.58), and social distance (0.76). Upon applying
the prompts that achieved these agreements to code previously human-uncoded messages, our
validation through human review of the randomly selected messages yielded high human-LLM
agreement (Cohen’s 𝜅 = 0.87), substantiating the validity of our LLM coding.
   Summary of T1 Results. Following our prompt-design exploration, we achieved a high overall
human-LLM agreement (Cohen’s 𝜅 = 0.69), comparable to the human-human agreement (Cohen’s
𝜅 = 0.71). Looking at specific attributions, we found higher human-LLM agreement than human-
human agreement for social distance (0.76 vs. 0.70), helping (0.69 vs. 0.56), and pity (0.50 vs. 0.36),
comparable agreement for fear (0.71 vs. 0.69) and responsibility (0.69 vs. 0.71), and lower agreement
for anger (0.65 vs. 0.75) and coercive segregation (0.58 vs. 0.71). As Figure 5 shows, the results
presumably point to the fact that: 1) LLMs process different components of the codebook in a
similar way to human coders, with varied consistency for different codes; 2) providing holistic
context (e.g., all-code components) generally improves LLM-human coding agreement, except for
codes with limited samples where it may introduce noise; and 3) the generally high human-LLM
consistency and the LLM’s human-like codebook-learning capability suggest that discrepancies
between human coders and LLMs have meaningful implications for subsequent disagreement
analyses, as they are more likely to shed light on improving the coding scheme rather than merely
reflecting LLM limitations.
4.2.3 Human-LLM Disagreement Analysis (T2). We shifted our focus to investigating the sources,
underlying causes, and implications of human-LLM disagreements to demonstrate one possible
way of implementing CHALET’s T2 in practice, though we recognize that the specific causes of
discrepancies may vary across different case studies and domains.
   T2 Procedure. After identifying messages where all 23 LLM-generated codes (produced by
the 23 prompts shown on the 𝑥-axes of Figure 5) consistently differed from the human codes,
we conducted a disagreement analysis using Chinh et al.’s open-discussion method [41]. Three
coders first independently audited these disagreements in separate spreadsheets by 1) recalling and
reflecting their previous coding (Section 4.2.1) rationale, 2) revisiting each message’s content, 3)
reviewing all 23 LLM-generated codes and their justification, and 4) categorizing each message as
stemming from human coding error, LLM coding error, or potentially indicating a new code.
   The coders then merged their individual analyses into a shared document for collaborative
review. During open discussions, they prioritized analyzing messages where their independent
categorizations differed. For messages where no coder had indicated potential new codes, they
resolved disagreements by sharing their interpretations of the message content and discussing
how it aligned with existing codes. When at least one coder suggested a potential new code, they
discussed why these messages might not fit into existing codes, examined to what extent they
differed from clearly coded messages, re-evaluated and re-defined the boundaries of current codes,
and explored potential semantic, syntactic, and linguistic patterns in these ambiguous messages. If,
after discussion, the coders believe that the message may indicate a new concept, it is retained for
further exploration in the next step.
   T2 Results. Of the total 4,143 messages, 273 (6.50%) had human codes that disagreed with all
23 LLM-generated codes. Specifically, among messages responding to questions about different
attributions, responses to coercive segregation had the highest number of disagreements (88 messages,
111:20                                                                                            et al.


32.23% of all disagreements), followed by responses to anger (51, 18.68%) and fear (47, 17.22%).
Lower rates of disagreement appeared in responses to responsibility (32, 11.72%), social distance (24,
8.79%), pity (18, 6.59%), and helping (13, 4.76%).
   Human-LLM Disagreement Categorization. Among these disagreements, the coders iden-
tified 51 (18.68%) messages indicating human coding errors. For example, in the following case,
humans coded the message as Stigmatizing (anger) while the LLM coded it as Non-stigmatizing.
Upon review, the coders agreed with the LLM’s interpretation, noting that they appeared to have
hastily coded the message as expressing anger due to the presence of the word “perhaps,” a type of
oversight that can occur when processing large volumes of data, where coders may react to specific
terms without fully considering their context:
         “Perhaps but if I knew they had mental health issues I would be understanding, and I
         would not get angry at them in response as that solves nothing.” (P3)
   The analysis also revealed 41 (15.02%) messages with LLM coding errors. In the example below,
the LLM coded the message as Non-stigmatizing, while the human coders coded it as Stigmatizing
(responsibility). The coders could not agree with the LLM’s interpretation, as phrases like “should
ask for help" imply personal responsibility and agency, which constitute a form of stigmatization:
         “I believe they should ask for help, and not assume things. Not at all.” (P386)
  Most significantly, the coders found 181 (66.30%) messages that suggested the need for new codes.
The following example illustrates the complexity of these messages:
         “I would feel embarrassment more than anger. But I would stand up for them and
         explain Avery’s condition to the others so they would have some sympathy. I would
         also like to chat with Avery after they cool down and explain how their emotions might
         dampen the mood of a social gathering.” (P242)
   Initially, the human coders coded this message as Stigmatizing (anger), due to the implicit
aversion expressed. The LLM’s interpretations varied when different prompts were used: eleven
variants led it to identify the message as Stigmatizing (pity), viewing the embarrassment as a lack
of sympathy, while twelve others saw it as Non-stigmatizing, emphasizing the willingness to help
and the expression of pity. By observing and discussing other examples like this one, the coders
hypothesized a potential pattern in the prompt variations: prompts that produced Stigmatizing
(pity) codes often (8 out of 11) included examples of the Stigmatizing (others) code and provided
more components (e.g., full codebook details, additional examples, and chain-of-thought text). In
contrast, when prompts generated Non-stigmatizing codes, they tended (6 out of 12) to contain
fewer components (e.g., only code names, vignettes, and keywords).
   Although there was no clear consensus between the human and LLM codes, during discussions,
the coders acknowledged the imprecision of their initial judgment of Stigmatizing (anger) upon
deeper reflection, noting that the expressed embarrassment and perceived aversion differed from
other Stigmatizing (anger) messages. The coders also rejected the notion that embarrassment
equates to a simple lack of pity, as embarrassment often stems from social discomfort rather than an
absence of sympathy, and dismissed Non-stigmatizing as an inaccurate code. The coders concluded
that the message conveyed a stigmatizing attitude not captured by the current coding scheme, and
thus marked it as a new code, prompting further analysis and theoretical development.
   Language Patterns in Human-LLM Disagreements. Interestingly, the coders found that
in 160 (58.60%) of the 273 disagreement messages, the LLM consistently coded messages as Non-
stigmatizing while humans coded them as Stigmatizing, with the reverse scenario occurring in
only 14 (5.12%) messages. During the open discussion, the coders discovered that messages that
LLMs coded as Non-stigmatizing but humans identified as Stigmatizing shared distinct language
Exploring the Human-LLM Synergy in Advancing Theory-driven Qualitative Analysis                         111:21


Table 3. Language patterns in messages coded as Stigmatizing by humans but Non-stigmatizing by LLMs
across all 23 prompt configurations, with one contrasting case where both agreed on Non-stigmatizing to
illustrate the distinction. These patterns were identified through open discussion among human coders who
reviewed 160 messages (out of 273 in which all LLM codes differed from human codes). See Section 4.2.3 for
the selection criteria and analysis details.


  Language Patterns        Quotes                                                         Human Codes

  ‘Someone     Else        Neighbors may find it hard to understand Avery’s out- Paternalism
  Might Think’             bursts and strange behavior if they do not know them very
                           well. I think you jumped a step. Surely they could talk to
                           someone regularly before hospitalization becomes neces-
                           sary. (P189)
  Over-conjecture &
  Misconception
     Over-                 It would depend on whether he was impacting the neigh- Disconnection and
     conjecture            borhood. I think he would mostly keep to himself. (P47)     Functional Incapa-
                                                                                       bility
      Misconception        If they are not threatening to me or others then I am com- Disconnection and
                           fortable. She isolates herself from others so she would not Functional Incapa-
                           feel a need to interact with them. (P144)                   bility
  Need & Suggestion
     Need                  I am not sure about that. It is very complex. Avery has a      Paternalism
                           lot going on. She definitely needs to talk to someone. No
                           weakness there. (P550)
      Suggestion           As long as they are not hurting anyone, I would suggest        Non-stigmatizing
                           that they seek treatment to help them feel better. I doubt
                           if they need to be hospitalized. Their behavior is upsetting
                           to them and to others, but they have not actually tried to
                           physically hurt anyone. (P460)
  Individual-level &
  Stereotypical-level
     Individual-           So far other members of the house are not at risk. Also, Self-neglect
     level                 isolating him might worsen his situation. He could start
                           having suicidal thoughts thereby hurting himself. (P282)
      Stereotypical-       Certainly, people with depression tend to face such difficul- Self-neglect
      level                ties and challenges. They find it quite hard to concentrate
                           and see things through. They easily get distracted. And if
                           not carefully managed, it progresses and gets worse and
                           may lead to suicidal thoughts creeping into their subcon-
                           scious. (P187)


patterns, as detailed in Table 3. Given that 33 of these 160 messages (20.63%) were marked as LLM
coding errors, identifying these patterns revealed crucial areas where LLMs fall short, particularly
in interpreting implicit, indirect, and tacit expressions of stigma.
   Specifically, LLMs may have overlooked how language patterns like someone else might think can
represent personal views, a nuance that human coders recognized through their social awareness
and interpersonal experience. This psycholinguistic nuance, known as “distancing language," [156]
involves expressing potentially stigmatizing views through third-party perspectives to disguise
personal opinions in socio-cultural contexts. In addition, LLMs struggled to differentiate between
the description of potential outcomes and current states – failing to recognize that over-conjecturing
about potential behaviors itself constitutes implicit stigma and microaggression. LLMs also tended
111:22                                                                                           et al.


to miss the tonal difference between need and suggestion, where “need" carries undertones of
paternalistic attitudes and power asymmetry, while “suggestion" reflects a more equitable relational
stance. Further, it appeared difficult for the LLMs to distinguish whether stigma was directed at
the vignette characters only or at people with depression as a whole, a critical distinction that the
human coders used to separate individual-level prejudice from stereotypical assumptions.


4.3 Collaborative Inductive Coding (T3)
To tackle T3, we took the final step of resolving disagreements and uncovering fresh insights absent
in the original coding scheme through inductive analysis of human-LLM discrepancies. This part
of the case study not only shows how to execute T3 of CHALET concretely, but also empirically
propels the deciphering of mental-illness stigma.


   T3 Procedure. We performed inductive coding on the 181 messages identified as potentially
containing new codes during our disagreement analysis. Inspired by prior research [53], we adopted
a human-LLM collaborative approach in which human coders first generated initial codes, LLMs
then refined them and proposed theme mergers, and human coders iteratively curated the final
coding scheme. The gpt-4-1106-preview model was used for all analyses.
   Concretely, three coders first familiarized themselves with all the messages and then indepen-
dently pre-coded them by taking notes on recurring data patterns. Each coder symbolically assigned
summative, salient, essence-capturing, and/or evocative codes to each message and created an-
alytic memos – sites for reflexive thinking and self-dialogue about the data [179] – in separate
spreadsheets. These codes and notes included both direct excerpts from participant messages (e.g.,
“will lose job") and their analytical insights (e.g., “humble", “hierarchy"). Coders then merged their
spreadsheets and openly discussed to exchange, explicate, and evolve their interpretations. They
used shared digital whiteboards as affinity diagrams (see Supplementary Materials) to arrange the
proposed codes and analytic memos.
   Next, the coders presented these initial human-generated codes and corresponding messages to
the LLM and asked it to revise code names, generate articulate, theory-grounded terminology, and
provide preliminary descriptions for each code, drawing on its broad psychological knowledge [55].
The human coders then discussed and assessed the LLM’s outputs and decided whether to adopt
them outright, modify them, or prompt the LLM for additional revisions. The LLM’s suggestions
(e.g., “inaction") were also added to the affinity diagram.
   The coders subsequently aggregated and theorized the codes by identifying commonalities
among them. They prompted the LLM to propose preliminary groupings of codes into sub-themes.
Three coders, along with the mental-health specialist on the research team, then organized and
re-grouped the post-it notes on the affinity diagram according to LLM’s grouping suggestions and
offered critiques as needed. Critiques may include requests to separate or merge certain codes and/or
address overly broad, generic, and logically inconsistent groupings. The coders iteratively directed
the LLM to revise and re-generate code-grouping proposals and conceptualized the emerging sub-
themes based on their own interpretations. Once the coders reached consensus on the hierarchical
coding scheme, they synthesized their analytic memos and the LLM’s outputs to extract the essence
of each sub-theme and formulate overarching definitions. Following the attribution model [48],
they categorized these sub-themes into three themes – cognitive judgments, emotional responses, and
behavioral responses. This cyclical process synthesized human analysis, LLM input, and collaborative
concept development.
Exploring the Human-LLM Synergy in Advancing Theory-driven Qualitative Analysis                                         111:23


   As part of our methodological choices, we compared it to an LLM-only method to evaluate
whether autonomous LLM coding is sufficient and to understand the extent to which the collab-
orative approach added value. For the autonomous LLM approach, three prompts7 were used.
First, the LLM identified initial codes with supporting excerpts from participant messages and
generated descriptions. Second, it reduced duplicate codes but preserved distinct excerpts. Third,
we had the LLM group codes into themes with descriptions at higher temperature (≥ 0.5) for greater
creativity, and then refine theme names based on the codes, descriptions, and excerpts [53]. These
two approaches were evaluated by means of expert-review sessions with the primary researcher
and the mental-health specialist.
   T3 Results. Through collaborative inductive coding, the coders discovered 12 new sub-themes
and 8 codes beyond the original attribution model [48]. This expanded coding scheme, detailed in
Table 4, deepens our understanding of mental-illness stigma by taking into account more implicit
stigmatizing mentality and other less easily detectable microaggressions, such as microassault,
microinsult, and microinvalidation [19, 68, 80, 83, 193], and by revealing how tacit, unintentional,
and socially normalized forms of stigmatization are expressed through apparently neutral or even
positive language.
   To illustrate how our human-LLM inductive coding enabled the identification of these implicit
forms of stigma, we present an example of how the coders derived and conceptualized a new
sub-theme from P219’s message:
        “I might not be frightened or being threatened regarding the potential implications of
         your interaction. Everything might be fine if you talk sensibly and do not cross your
         limits." (P219)
   Initially, human coders coded this message as Stigmatizing (fear), while the LLM coded it as
Non-stigmatizing. After the discussion, the coders flagged potentially problematic phrases like “talk
sensibly" and “do not cross your limits," which were added to the affinity diagram. These phrases
implied heightened vigilance – a pattern the coders initially coded as “treat them differently". When
presented to the LLM, it suggested the code name “special care”, a term the coders adopted as it better
captured the duality of this behavioral intention – while seemingly expressing consideration, this
type of “care" actually reinforced an us-versus-them divide, since such extraordinary precautions
would not normally be present in ordinary social interactions. The coders then grouped similar
expressions across messages, such as “be aware," “do not trigger," and “everything will be fine as long
as you maintain composure." While the LLM proposed “preemptive self-protection" as a sub-theme,
consultation with the mental-health specialist led to the term “differential support" (sub-theme 3.3
in Table 4) to capture this out-group discrimination. This iterative coding process was applied to
all 181 messages, yielding the expanded coding scheme.




7 1) “We are conducting inductive coding on mental-illness stigma. Identify up to 181 of the most relevant codes in the text,

provide a name for each code in no more than 3 words, 4 lines of meaningful and dense description of the code, and a quote from
the participant for each code no longer than 7 lines," 2) “Determine which items in the following list of topics are completely
unique," and 3) “Determine how all the codes can be grouped into themes. Group only the code numbers and provide a name and
description for each theme" [53].
111:24                                                                                                      et al.

Table 4. The expanded coding scheme for mental-illness stigma. The green sub-themes represent those in the
original attribution model [48]. Other sub-themes were generated through collaborative inductive coding.

 Themes       (Sub-themes,      Quotes
 Codes)
 Theme 1: Cognitive Judgment
   Responsibility             I really cannot say as I do not have the full details about Avery’s life, but if
                              their current situation is triggered by maybe a habit of theirs, then they
                              need to step up and do better. (P45)
   Sub-theme 1.1: Self-
   neglect
       Code 1.1.1: Think they Certainly, people with depression tend to face such difficulties and chal-
       will suicide and do lenges. They find it quite hard to concentrate and see things through. They
       self-harm              easily get distracted. And if not carefully managed, it progresses and gets
                              worse and may lead to suicidal thoughts creeping into their subconscious.
                              (P187)
       Code 1.1.2: Think they Not scared of Avery, just concerned for their well-being. I might be con-
       cannot take care of cerned about whether or not they would show up and if they would be
       themselves very well prepared, dressed appropriately, and such. I might also take on responsi-
                              bility for booking things if I were worried they would not get that kind of
                              task done. (P333)
   Sub-theme 1.2: Vulnera-
   bility
       Code 1.2.1: Think they I would feel worried for them regarding their safety. Others may retaliate
       will be harmed by oth- to the anger Avery displayed. (P394)
       ers
       Code 1.2.2: Think they Not frightened or threatened but maybe triggered. Triggering my own
       will bring trauma      depression because of being around someone who is in a completely “down”
                              state of feeling. (P600)
   Sub-theme 1.3: Crime-      Certainly not. It is not a humane way of dealing with someone with a
   prone                      mental illness like depression specifically. If they are still of sound mind
                              and can make decisions for themselves they have the ability to turn their
                              lives around. However, if their depression was making them act violently
                              toward others or influenced them to partake in criminal behavior then yes
                              I agree they should be hospitalized, only in an extreme case. (P144)
   Sub-theme 1.4: Mini-
   mization
       Code 1.4.1: Think they I would let them know I will be there to assist if needed. Help may be
       will deny that they declined. They might not think they have a problem. (P270)
       have a mental illness
       Code 1.4.2: Think I probably would, but I would want to stress that they should feel free to
       they have no problem talk to me about any issues. Avery seems like a good person. They enjoy
       and can recover learning. They currently have problems, but I feel those can be overcome.
       themselves             (P637)
   Sub-theme 1.5: Discon-
   nection and Functional
   Incapability
       Code 1.5.1: Think While feeling concerned for the well-being and the potential impact on
       they are not well- the neighborhood, I might also be uncertain about the appropriateness
       integrated        into of separating Avery and advocating for hospitalization without a clear
       society                understanding of their specific needs. (P435)
Exploring the Human-LLM Synergy in Advancing Theory-driven Qualitative Analysis                           111:25



 Themes       (Sub-themes,      Quotes
 Codes)
       Code 1.5.2: Think they Assuming there are no issues with paying bills, I see no reason why not.
       are incapable of func- Depression or depressive episodes on their own do not bother me to the
       tioning normally       point where I would deny the person to be a tenant, but if the situation
                              leads to an inability to fulfill payments, then that would be an issue. (P420)
 Theme 2: Emotional Response
   Anger                      To a certain extent, I will feel a bit angry because I want all my guests to
                              have a good time, but I try to make people understand Avery’s behavior.
                              They need help and should be empathized with. (P64)
   Pity                       Unlikely. I have my own concerns and Avery may not need my input. I do
                              not want to get involved. (P148)
   Fear                       Yes definitely. I will need to have more information on what triggers her
                              episodes. When she is in a crowded place or if she sees joyful people. (P154)
   Sub-theme 2.1: Apathy      It is not about separation or not, but what the doctors deem necessary.
                              Nothing, we all have our own issues to deal with. (P165)
   Sub-theme 2.2: Frustra-    I would not if they were open about their struggles. However, if they never
   tion                       shared then I might feel hurt. Openness is key. If they are open to sharing
                              then I would understand the struggle and not read into their behavior too
                              much because I would know they are having a bad day with chemical
                              imbalance. (P533)
   Sub-theme 2.3: Embar- I would feel embarrassment more than anger. But I would stand up for
   rassment                   them and explain to the others of Avery’s condition so they would have
                              some sympathy. I would also like to have a chat with Avery after they cool
                              down and explain how their emotions might cause a damper on the mood
                              of a social gathering. (P242)
   Sub-theme 2.4: Com-        I will be neutral in that situation. I believe there is a limit to how much you
   passion Fatigue            can accommodate anger and pain from a loved one. (P434)
 Theme 3: Behavioral Response
   Social Distance            Honestly, I do not think I would. I would be concerned that they would not
                              take care of the place, or they would lose their job and not be able to pay.
                              (P260)
   Helping                    No. I would feel like it would have a negative impact. Lack of assistance on
                              her part. (P67)
   Coercive Segregation       Yes. She will get worse. Her mental state might spill out into arguments
                              with innocent people. (P136)
   Sub-theme 3.1: Differ-     Not frightened, but I would be aware of her sensitive position always, in
   ential Support             order I could choose my words more wisely. When you are depressed you
                              already feel so bad about things, that anything can make it feel even worse.
                              That is the care you need to have. (P374)
   Sub-theme 3.2: Pater-      No, I feel that Avery is feeling withdrawn due to their depression. Avery
   nalism                     needs someone to “take the reins” and listen to their needs. Avery needs
                              friendship to support mental health and mental health referrals. (P239)
   Sub-theme 3.3: Conde- No, that seems too far. I am not a doctor and would not know if that is best
   scension                   for them. They do not seem to be physically violent or self-harming and
                              they need to be taught how to deal with everyday life rather than being
                              removed from it. (P130)

  Reliability Validation. To validate our findings and assess the extent to which our expanded
coding scheme could improve human-LLM agreement, we applied the same LLM deductive-coding
approach (Section 4.2.2) to the 273 discrepant messages identified in Section 4.2.3. We retained
111:26                                                                                           et al.


the prompt structure from Figure 6, using an all-code prompt that included code names, the
vignette, coding rules & specifications, keywords, and one example for each of the 19 sub-themes
(including both the original seven attributions and twelve newly uncovered sub-themes) from
Table 4, plus a Non-stigmatizing code. This coding process achieved a Cohen’s 𝜅 of 0.23. Notably,
analyzing these persistent discrepancies informed the coders to further clarify the definitions of
the newly discovered codes. After clarification, Cohen’s 𝜅 improved to 0.26. Although the increase
in consistency is small, we should point out that it is a relatively substantial advance in the human-
LLM agreement compared to when we used the original attribution model [48], which failed to
produce any matches with human coding. Yet, it’s worth noting that 111 out of 273 messages
(40.66%) were still recognized as LLM coding errors by human coders, with 79 (71.17%) of these
retaining their previous inaccurate codes. This shows the potential limitation of applying LLMs
in this qualitative-coding task. When we then applied the expanded coding scheme to all 4,200
human-coded messages, Cohen’s 𝜅 also improved from 0.69 to 0.72.
   We also conducted human coding on messages from the remaining uncoded 402 participants
(out of 1,002 total) to further evaluate how well our findings generalized to new data. We randomly
sampled 100 messages and had three human coders analyze them using both the original attribution
model [48] and our expanded coding scheme. The comparison revealed an improvement in human-
human agreement: using the attribution model, coders failed to reach a consensus on 23 out of 100
messages (Cohen’s 𝜅 = 0.67), while using the extended coding scheme, they disagreed on only 9
messages (Cohen’s 𝜅 = 0.87). This confirms that our expanded coding scheme could presumably be
applicable to previously unseen data and increase coding consistency.
   Comparison with Autonomous LLM Coding. The results of the autonomous LLM coding are
reported in Appendix C. Three coders and the mental-health specialist evaluated both approaches by
rating their generated codebooks on a five-point Likert scale (1 = lowest, 5 = highest) using measures
of ease of use, code clarity, mutual exclusivity, and exhaustiveness. These criteria were chosen based
on previous work on codebook quality [179] and LLM-assisted codebook development [18]. The
collaborative approach received higher ratings on all measures (code clarity: 4.75 vs. 2.50, mutual
exclusivity: 4.00 vs. 1.75, ease of use: 4.00 vs. 3.25, exhaustiveness: 4.00 vs. 3.50). We empirically
found that the autonomous LLM approach produced five relatively descriptive, superficial codes
without explanatory interpretation – e.g., “Traveling Concerns" (codes 7.1 and 11.1) captured visible
actions but missed the underlying fear, while “Tenant Acceptance" (codes 4.1 and 10.2) described
housing decisions without recognizing the participant’s distancing tendency. Themes like “Mental
Health Focus" (theme 3) were overly generic with vague descriptions of “topics specifically related
to mental health issues". The codebook in Table 7 showed potential redundancy, exemplified by
“Community and Social Support" (theme 9) and “Support Systems" (theme 2) describing overlapping
support-related concepts. Quantitatively, of the 26 codes generated, 16 were duplicates (61.54%),
such as the code “Anger Management" appearing four times in different themes. These findings
suggest that CHALET’s human participation and co-creation remain crucial when inductively coding
psychological constructs like mental-illness stigma.

5   Discussion
Our proposed systematic approach, CHALET, provides a roadmap for collaborative human-LLM
theory-driven qualitative analysis. Through three interlocking tasks – deductive coding, disagree-
ment analysis, and inductive coding – we showed that the approach can direct human coders’
attention to aspects of the codebook needing revision, provide alternative perspectives that enrich
understanding of core theoretical constructs underlying the coding schemes, and facilitate the
development of new themes through human-LLM collaboration. We hope these observations can
provide the driving forces to broaden the use of LLM in qualitative coding, in the sense that LLM is
Exploring the Human-LLM Synergy in Advancing Theory-driven Qualitative Analysis                111:27


more than just an automated tool that replaces human coders; rather, it can collaborate with human
coders to enhance the overall coding process.
   In the first task, human coders performed deductive coding to provide examples and interpreta-
tions to train LLMs to acquire qualitative-coding skills (T1). We demonstrated that by systematically
exploring prompt settings (e.g., textual structure, parameters) and what combinations of codebook
components to include in the prompt, LLMs can effectively support the theory-driven qualitative
coding. Our practice helps to reduce human-LLM coding disagreements caused by inadequate
prompts or inaccurate/deviant LLM interpretations, so that remaining disagreements are more
likely to arise from potential limitations within the coding scheme and the theories themselves.
   We observed that LLMs and humans may interpret certain ambiguous or difficult-to-define
constructs differently. Analysis of these discrepancies (T2) helped reveal data patterns that
warranted deeper qualitative analysis. These patterns may indicate that the codebook lacked
sufficiently clear guidance for coders to reach a consensus, which allowed the human coders to
discover potential imperfections in the theoretical framework and explore opportunities for theory
development. In doing so, the LLMs also helped the human coders recover from some of their
oversight and re-evaluate coding decisions by flagging certain details they may have missed. The
disagreement analysis also unveiled semantic, pragmatic, and/or psycholinguistic markers that
uniquely challenge LLMs, which helped to understand how to improve LLMs’ ability to understand
high-level socio-psychological constructs.
   Through inductive coding (T3), we further conceptualize human-LLM disagreement to enrich
the existing coding scheme. The disagreement-resolving process leverages the complementary
strengths of humans and LLMs – humans bring social awareness and empathetic interpretations
based on social norms and personal experience, while LLMs excel at consistent, semantically precise
coding derived from their vast training corpora. Though tackling human-human disagreement [218]
is undoubtedly important, addressing human-LLM disagreement offers additional benefits beyond
adding another human coder – LLM codes, based on vast and diverse training data, can be produced
rapidly, help human coders reconsider concepts from multiple viewpoints, and potentially generate
serendipitous discoveries, facilitating a more holistic unpacking of complex social phenomena like
mental-illness stigma. Here, we should emphasize that while the derived new codes and theoretical
constructs offer qualitative insights and are partially supported by existing theoretical frameworks
[19, 59, 192], our primary contribution lies in proposing a methodology that leverages human-LLM
synergy to facilitate such theoretical discovery and in demonstrating the value of human-LLM
coding discrepancies in theory-led qualitative analysis.

5.1   LLMs’ Capabilities for Advancing Qualitative Analysis
5.1.1 Prompts for Superior Human-LLM Coding Agreement. Prior works [74, 104, 118, 195] exam-
ined the use of simple prompts and/or discussed common techniques such as chain-of-thought
prompting and few-shot/zero-shot settings, and showed LLMs’ satisfactory performance in var-
ious text annotation tasks, including objective [13, 81, 164, 182, 206] and subjective [7, 104, 135]
tasks. Generally, our case study showed similar results to these studies [97] – we found that LLMs
performed comparably to human coders in identifying mental-illness stigma, with human-LLM
agreement (Cohen’s 𝜅=0.69) approaching human-human agreement (Cohen’s 𝜅=0.71). More impor-
tantly, we went further by systematically exploring prompt design and leveraging human-LLM
disagreements to detect potential gaps in codebooks and theories, which differs from existing
literature that typically uses simplistic prompts and aims to minimize disagreements for “accuracy"
[63, 102, 115, 171].
   Our case-study results showed that providing all codebook components for all codes in prompts
generally improves LLM-human agreement, with two exceptions: pity and coercive segregation.
111:28                                                                                            et al.


For pity, codebook components from other codes can act as noise, with Cohen’s 𝜅 decreasing from
0.50 to 0.46 when comparing the target-code condition to the all-code condition (Table 5). This
decrease could be attributed to how pity is presumably different from other attributions in the
stigmatization context and their potential overlap in expression. For attributions like anger or fear,
the presence of these emotions indicates stigma, whereas for pity it is the opposite – showing no
pity reflects stigmatizing attitudes. This vagueness becomes more pronounced when the LLM is
exposed to codebook components from multiple attributions, as messages that should be coded as
Stigmatizing (pity) due to lack of sympathy might instead be misclassified as Stigmatizing (anger)
or Stigmatizing (fear) if these emotional responses appear in the messages.
   For coercive segregation, we unexpectedly observed from Table 5 that providing only code
names for all codes yielded better LLM-human agreement (Cohen’s 𝜅 = 0.58) compared to including
full codebook components (Cohen’s 𝜅 = 0.54). One possible reason is that human coders also evolve
their understanding from collaborative codebook creation, discussion, and verbal guidance beyond
the written codebook. For example, human coders debated what constitutes a forced action and
dissected the varying intensities of different phrasings, considering the differing severity implied by
terms such as “therapy", “psychiatric treatment", “hospitalization," and “see a doctor." LLMs, however,
were not provided the same historical interactive context to learn and relied solely on written
descriptions [63], where the codebook didn’t explicitly articulate these subtle term distinctions.
Thus, the added components likely contained only superficial knowledge without teaching LLMs
the gist of semantically differentiating coercive or segregative behaviors.
   Recognition of LLMs’ struggle with such potential code overlaps (as in pity) and tonal sub-
tleties (as in coercive segregation) further informed prompt design. These prompt-related exceptions
drew our attention to hardly discernible patterns, such as those in Table 3, prompted coders to
re-examine both the boundaries between multiple emotional responses and the spectrum from
strongly coercive, sermonizing statements to softer suggestions, revealed codebook ambiguities,
and catalyzed new code definitions and conceptualizations.
   It should be noted that our primary goal is not to find optimally engineered prompts for all tasks;
rather, we believe that for most of the given dataset and codebook, the proposed exploration could
train LLMs to a level of consistency that allows them to learn from human-created codebooks to
perform deductive coding and collaborate with human coders. Our results suggest that it would
be beneficial if future research investigates how LLMs perform when allowed to assign multiple
codes to a single message, which better reflects the complexity of real-world qualitative-coding
scenarios, and examines whether false positives in multi-code predictions reflect code overlap,
LLM limitations, or vagueness in the coding scheme that needs clarification. Future work should
also explore systematic prompting approaches to capture and formalize the non-written, tacit,
experiential, and consensual knowledge that emerges through human coding practices
into LLM training processes to enhance human-LLM collaboration further.

5.1.2 Locating LLMs’ Limitation in Coding Psychological Constructs. In addition to the methodologi-
cal contributions, our case study itself also has practical value. Recent studies have explored the use
of LLMs to automatically analyze human psychological constructs through language [105, 142, 163],
the medium through which these constructs are expressed [67, 126]. Our practice contributes to
this body of research by identifying key limitations of LLMs’ ability to interpret these constructs.
   Through human-LLM disagreement analysis, we found that accurate coding of psychological
constructs requires unique human capacities that LLMs currently lack, including rich interpersonal
experience, societal awareness, and the ability to perceive social cues. For instance, LLMs
struggle to recognize “distancing language" [156], where the use of passive voice, euphemisms,
and avoidance of first-person pronouns signals psychological distance from people with mental
Exploring the Human-LLM Synergy in Advancing Theory-driven Qualitative Analysis                     111:29


illness. We therefore encourage future research to address these limitations and also call for greater
attention to the psycholinguistic nuances [143] between social-media data, which is commonly
used for language-based inference [163], and conversational texts, such as those sourced from
human-chatbot interactions, when training LLMs to code psychological constructs.

5.2   Collaborative Human-LLM Approach for Theory-driven Qualitative Analysis
5.2.1 From Manual Hybrid Deductive/Inductive Coding to Human-LLM Collaboration. Our study
contributes to research on hybrid, purely human-led qualitative coding [29, 71, 166, 197, 215]
through human-LLM collaboration, particularly through the analysis of human-LLM disagreements.
   First, incorporating a consistent, semantically driven, and rule-abiding LLM coder into the
conceptualization process can help uncover ambiguities that might be missed when ana-
lyzing human-human disagreements alone, while also increasing the certainty of their
identification. From our practice, we observed that even with standardized codebook guidance,
different human coders may have slight variations in perceiving the scope of each code during the
human deductive-coding phase prior to LLM involvement. These differences result from human
coders’ innate subjective interpretations of the underlying intent of messages, which are shaped
by their positionality [203] – including their social positions, identities, and worldviews. When
encountering messages that appear to conform to an existing code but differ from other messages
within that code, human coders may experience hesitation about whether to develop a new code or
fit it into the existing theoretical framework, especially when there is potential overlap between
how different coders sense the scope of each code.
   Adding an LLM coder can presumably contribute to coding decisions when human coders are
uncertain about code boundaries, because the LLM’s consistent, linguistically focused coding
may provide a clearer signal. That is, when the LLM indicates that forcing a message into an
existing code will lead to disagreement, it gives human coders more confidence to revisit the
message and consider developing a new code. Interestingly, of the 273 messages with human-LLM
disagreements, 120 (43.96%) also showed human-human disagreements. Of these, 86 (71.67%) were
ultimately defined as new codes. These figures show that the analysis of human-LLM disagreements
not only helps identify more potentially ambiguous messages (273 vs. 120) but also increases the
certainty of coding decisions by transforming initially uncertain instances into better-defined
new codes (86 vs. 0). To illustrate this specifically, during our initial deductive coding, the coders
encountered the following message:
        “I would give them pointers on how they themselves could do the project, but I would
        not complete it for them. Hopefully, it would open their eyes that they can be successful
        despite challenges." (P422)
   One coder initially coded it as Non-stigmatizing, while another coded it as Stigmatizing (helping).
When discussing this human-human disagreement, the coders identified the phrase “give them
pointers" as a form of indirect help. According to the codebook, the coders felt that this message could
be interpreted either way – as a form of assistance (Non-stigmatizing) or, despite the willingness to
help, as reflecting an unequal power dynamic (Stigmatizing (helping)). The coders chose the latter
after discussion, although some uncertainty lingered about this coding decision. Whichever variant
of the prompt was used, the LLM consistently coded it as Non-stigmatizing, reminding the human
coders of the fact that this type of help was far from overtly stigmatizing messages, such as P368’s “I
don’t want to help because I don’t want to babysit petulant child". This LLM output allowed the coders
to revisit the message with confidence and recognize that while it was not purely Non-stigmatizing,
it did not fit neatly into the existing Stigmatizing (helping) code. This led the coders to create a new
code, Condescension, which captured the implicit stigma in the participant’s behavior of “giving
111:30                                                                                              et al.


pointers" and emphasized how this action would “open their eyes", exemplifying how human-LLM
disagreement analysis can uncover equivocal messages that might escape detection in human-only
analysis.
   Second, human-LLM disagreement analysis also helps locate human coding errors that might
otherwise go undetected in human-only approaches. Specifically, in our case study, human coders
initially agreed on 28 messages, but later disagreement analysis with LLMs revealed that these were
human coding errors, accounting for 54.9% of the total 51 human coding errors identified. These
cases emerged when both human coders, after observing consistently different interpretations
by LLMs, were prompted to recognize their initial inaccurate coding decisions and subsequently
arrived at potentially more thoughtful and precise codes. This highlights LLMs’ potential to mitigate
occasional human errors due to fatigue, carelessness, or inattention. Such potential suggests that
human coders, while skilled, are not infallible, and LLMs could help to “read between the lines" – to
capture what was not said but was meant – a capability particularly valuable when working with
human coders who are non-native speakers and may fail to pick up on such nuances.
   Finally, LLMs can simulate different coding outcomes and rationales, rapidly generating
diverse interpretations of messages. The results in Supplementary Materials show that LLMs
can assign at least three valid codes to the same message when given different prompt variants. Of
the 4,153 messages analyzed, 599 (14.42%) received at least three different codes from LLMs, with
the distribution across stigma attributions being: helping (127), coercive segregation (112), pity (124),
anger (96), social distance (66), fear (49), and responsibility (25). For instance, P357’s statement “I
would feel comfortable entrusting it to Avery – but only if she were seeking help to manage her mental
health" was interpreted differently depending on the prompt used. It was coded as Stigmatizing
(social distance) due to the awareness of conditional comfort, as Stigmatizing (responsibility) be-
cause of the emphasis on Avery’s need to seek help independently, or as Non-stigmatizing when
prioritizing the willingness to entrust tasks. This rapid production of diverse codes allows human
coders to quickly explore a wider range of potential interpretations, incentivizing reflection on
areas where the codebook may be vague or where code may overlap, much like discussing the
codes with another set of human coders. Fruitful avenues for future research include systematically
comparing human-human and human-LLM disagreements, specifically analyzing when and why
these disagreements coincide or occur separately, as such analysis may reveal distinct patterns in
how humans and LLMs navigate language that falls in the interstices between theoretical constructs.

5.2.2 Trade-off between Human Involvement and LLM Automation. Our CHALET method’s three
main tasks carefully balance human expertise with LLM capabilities, reflecting our finding that
while LLMs show promise in automating qualitative coding, strategic human involvement
remains critical. First, before involving LLMs in T1 (i.e., LLM deductive coding), we intentionally
had human coders analyze a substantial volume of messages (e.g., 4,200 in our case study) in a
deductive way, given that human coders’ interpretations, developed through codebook creation
and team discussions [63], can establish a reliable baseline, directly influence how human-LLM
disagreements are identified, and guide subsequent conceptualization.
   Second, our human-LLM disagreement analysis (T2) extends previous studies [40, 219] by using
LLM-human discrepancies to foster a more efficient, targeted, and less labor-intensive coding
process. Specifically, it prioritizes and guides human coders toward a smaller but potentially
more theoretically valuable subset of the data, rather than requiring them to inductively code
large volumes of data that may be homogeneous. However, we also recognize that this efficiency
potentially comes at a cost – in our case study, for instance, selecting only messages where all LLM-
generated codes are inconsistent with human-assigned codes risks overlooking some human-coding
errors and codebook ambiguities that exist outside our disagreement analysis.
Exploring the Human-LLM Synergy in Advancing Theory-driven Qualitative Analysis                   111:31


   And third, in T3 (i.e., collaborative inductive coding), our case study empirically demonstrates that
LLMs could independently produce only relatively superficial inductive codes (see Appendix C), and
combining these codes with human-led induction proved important in broadening and clarifying
what and how underlying psychological constructs should be used for coding mental-illness stigma.
With these considerations in mind, we encourage future research to pursue two directions: 1)
normative discussions exploring flexible coding strategies in which human involvement adapts to
language complexity, particularly for data rich in implicit meaning or contextual nuance, and 2)
systematic ways to select which disagreements to analyze and determine appropriate inclusion
criteria, for example, relaxing current selection criteria to include messages with a certain small
percentages of human-LLM agreement, high human-human disagreement, or high variance in LLM
codes across prompts.

5.3   Epistemological and Ontological Reconfigurations in Human-LLM Qualitative
      Analysis
5.3.1 Redistributing Agency Between Human and LLMs. Our work initiates a critical discussion
about how agency is operated and re-allocated in human-LLM collaborative qualitative analysis
generally, given that agency has long been central to qualitative research and interpretivist social
science [65]. Barad’s agential realism [17] theorizes the ontological inseparability of intra-acting
agencies from post-structuralist and post-humanist perspectives. Specifically, this theory proposes
the notion of intra-action, challenges conventional notions of pre-figured entities by positing that
entities come into being through their mutual interconnections, and captures how agency arises as
a relational effect rather than a property possessed by individual actants.
   Under Barad’s influence, recent scholars have attempted to reframe human-algorithm relation-
ships [22], move beyond assumptions that humans and algorithms exist as separate entities that
subsequently interact, and further reveal how algorithms enliven subjectivities through processes of
entangled co-constitution [25]. In such human-algorithm assemblages, the knots threaded between
computational processes and human sensemaking reveal how agency disperses across relationalities
where humans do not merely use algorithms, but are interwoven with them, insofar as both are
actualized and co-evolve into specific types of subjects [25]. The increasingly agentic nature of
LLM-based agents is further changing how agency is construed in human-LLM qualitative analysis,
prompting a shift from asking who holds agency to examining how it is embodied, situated, and
hybridized through partnered coding processes.
   In response, our method, CHALET, draws from insights related to Barad’s agential realism [17],
wherein human coders, on the one hand, maintain agency by 1) categorizing interpretive disagree-
ments with LLM coders (T2), 2) transforming those discrepancies into potential new theoretical
constructs (T3), and 3) making ultimate decisions by curating overall theoretical coherence, with
their subjectivities themselves partly shaped by the engagement with LLM-generated coding results.
Empirically, such interplay was observed in our case study, where human coders were occasionally
persuaded by LLM-suggested codes (51 out of 273 disagreements) and/or began to reflect on the
fluid boundaries between codes, prompted by the LLM’s interpretive alternatives. Conversely, LLMs
also enact agency by 1) surfacing inconsistencies with human coders (T2), 2) rapidly proposing
multiple, alternative code suggestions (T1, T3), and 3) modulating their outputs in response to
human-written prompts (T1) – prompt design, in this sense, becomes not mere instruction-giving
but a practice through which human coders participate in constituting the LLM’s agency. Together,
these agentic movements, we believe, are not unidirectional; rather, in CHALET, human and LLM
coders are co-evolving through gradual, intertwined interpretations and productive disagree-
ment to finally yield theoretical insights. We call for future theoretical work in HCI that articulates
how displaying LLMs’ coding confidence affects agency distribution in human-LLM qualitative
111:32                                                                                           et al.


coding, building on research showing that when AI reveal their confidence levels, humans feel
more in control (i.e., agency) [207] and stay more aware of their own analytical capabilities (i.e.,
metacognition) [128].

5.3.2 Bridging Computational Methodology with Interpretive Inquiry. Our methodology empirically
contributes to the understanding of how computational approaches can productively engage
with interpretive inquiry rather than displace it, with implications that extend across quali-
tative HCI research. As discussed by Schroeder et al. [183], a tension exists where, on one hand,
qualitative researchers internalize a responsibility to preserve hermeneutic power through immer-
sive, pen-and-paper exploration with data, honoring its multiplicity and thickness; on the other
hand, computational tools, particularly LLMs, can generate luminous, seemingly seductive sum-
maries, labels, and/or topics that can possibly draw researchers away from situated, on-the-ground
engagement, thus blurring the boundaries between positivist and interpretive paradigms [145] and
risking contentious shifts toward scale, abstraction, and delegation that might homogenize the rich
diversity of innate human elements [183, 191].
   Accordingly, we envision that the CHALET approach could offer a potential way to navigate this
tension. Rather than having humans code a subset and then delegating the remainder to LLMs as
labor-saving tools (i.e., sequencing), we propose that humans and LLMs code overlapping data and
analyze disagreements (i.e., parallelism), a methodology that transforms LLMs from being used as
shortcuts into agentic collaborators, maintains qualitative researchers’ deep immersion in data, and
openly harnesses LLMs’ broad knowledge to absorb diverse coding rationales (T2). In particular,
CHALET creates a middle ground that helps preserve the thickness valued in qualitative research
(human deductive coding and T3) on one side, and on the other side leverages capabilities of
LLMs beyond mere automation, such as drawing on vast training corpora and rapidly simulating
different analytical voices (T1). Moving forward, we hope our paper will spark cross-disciplinary
conversations that help HCI researchers with an interpretive orientation better harness LLMs
by recognizing the boundaries of their capabilities [16, 201], and support those with computing
backgrounds to ground their work in social theories, ultimately nurturing emerging fields like
computational social science and strengthening HCI’s theoretical foundations for more thoughtful
socio-technical systems.

5.4      Practical Guidance for Applying CHALET to Human-LLM Qualitative Analysis
5.4.1 Scope and Generalizability of CHALET. We view CHALET as a conceptual-methodological
framework that operates independently of specific data sources (e.g., human-chatbot conversations),
domains (e.g., mental-illness stigma), and theories (e.g., attribution model [48]), with its three-
task structure designed at a general level to highlight the value of human-AI collaboration
in theory-driven qualitative analysis. Our approach shows particular promise in domains with
existing social theories, where researchers can build upon these theories to better conceptualize
complex sociological and psychological constructs [85, 138] from new empirical data – for example,
applying CHALET to better understand human decision-making processes that emerge from interview
data using the Theory of Planned Behavior [3] as a starting point. However, CHALET may be less
appropriate for 1) objective classification tasks (e.g., topic categorization, document classification
[95]), where human-LLM disagreements represent errors rather than opportunities for theoretical
discovery, 2) tasks that yield limited theoretical insights (e.g., categorizing emotions as simply
positive or negative [135]), where there is little need to generate new codes/(sub-)themes, and 3)
purely exploratory data-driven studies without existing conceptual foundations (e.g., interviews for
system usability testing [110]), where the absence of theory prevents structured data collection
and grounding for human deductive coding.
Exploring the Human-LLM Synergy in Advancing Theory-driven Qualitative Analysis                  111:33


   To help researchers apply these boundary conditions to their own domains, here is a concrete
example: HCI researchers studying “how users experience harm from AI systems” could begin with
an established theory-informed coding scheme (e.g., representational, allocative, and interpersonal
harms [187]) to code interview transcripts with affected users, have LLMs code the same transcripts
using the same scheme (T1), then analyze human-LLM disagreements (T2) and collaborate with
LLMs through inductive coding (T3) to discover new harm sub-themes/codes, such as relational
transgressions [222] within the broader theme of interpersonal harm. We hope these clarifications
provide practical future directions for HCI researchers to 1) test constructs derived through CHALET
in quantitative studies to assess its methodological rigor, and 2) apply CHALET to qualitative research
across different theoretical paradigms and cultural contexts, building more systematic evidence for
its transferability.


5.4.2 Cross-cultural Considerations: Decolonizing Human-LLM Collaboration. We remind readers in
any HCI qualitative research context to remain mindful that socio-cultural factors fundamentally
shape how CHALET applies across disciplines and cultural settings. Sociohistorically, colonialism
reshaped socio-cultural structures by amplifying and institutionalizing divisions within local
communities as a means of control, a logic that persists as coloniality and continues to be studied
by postcolonialism [39]. Recent postcolonial computing scholars [106] contend that socio-technical
systems, particularly LLMs, operate through colonial impulse [52], design choices that reanimate
universalist assumptions, encode reductionist representations, and reinforce colonial hierarchies
[60], producing cultural hegemony where certain identities become normative through practices
that marginalize subcultural groups as deviant and/or non-normative [46, 49]. This colonial impulse
leaves an imprint through mechanisms such as cultural assimilation [69], a Western gaze that
imposes Western interpretations onto non-Western contexts [116], tokenistic representations that
flatten difference into stereotype [178], and broader ideological structures (e.g., imperialism and
masculinist) [79] that result in the essentialization of diverse identities [92].
   When applied to our human-LLM collaboration scenario, these concerns become salient, as our
integration of LLMs into theory-driven qualitative coding necessitates socio-cultural text processing
in which performativity [35], the practice by which language constructs and enacts identities
through vernacular, sociolects, and culturally embedded norms, is central, yet the algorithmic
translation of such dynamic, context-dependent performances into computational representations
intelligible to LLMs remains opaque, potentially reductive, and vulnerable to perturbations that may
reinscribe colonial logics [60]. Furthermore, the agential nature of LLMs may actually intensify this
challenge, as their lack of reflexivity, ambiguous grounding, and potential to embody Westernized
perspectives can complicate interpretive processes in disagreement analysis – a setting in which
coding outcomes are jointly shaped by who the human coders are (e.g., their cultural positionalities),
which LLMs are used (e.g., their training data and institutional origins), and what is being coded
(e.g., topics and theories with high socio-cultural sensitivity, such as mental-illness stigma) [203].
   As such, we present actionable recommendations for practitioners adopting CHALET in cross-
cultural contexts. First, akin to human-only qualitative coding requires reflexive awareness of who
the human coders are and how their backgrounds shape interpretation [203], agential human-LLM
collaboration likewise demands practitioners’ careful attention to which proprietary LLMs are
used, the stereotypes embedded in their training data, and how these biases intersect with
the selected theories (e.g., attribution model [48]) and the data being coded (e.g., interview about
mental illness). Second, practitioners should actively involve local community members in
the development and validation of codebooks, creating opportunities for the codes produced
by Western-trained AI systems to be questioned or reshaped by indigenous knowledge systems.
111:34                                                                                         et al.


And third, practitioners must remain attentive to the power dynamics in human-LLM dis-
agreement analysis, especially whether LLMs can offer diverse or counterfactual explanations
that challenge dominant narratives, and how such disagreements may either reinforce Western
interpretive frames or create space for alternative perspectives.

5.5      Broader Implications
5.5.1 Navigating AI Aversion and Dependence through Negotiation. Our CHALET methodology, which
treats disagreement as a site of productive dialogue and can be viewed as a form of structured
human-LLM negotiation, has potential, in human-AI collaboration broadly, to help temper the
common vacillation between AI aversion and AI dependence [34, 136], resisting both the dismissal
of AI contributions, which may stem from a sense of agency threat, and AI overtrust, which can
contribute to agency loss.
   Specifically, rather than reacting to disagreements with distrust and automatically attributing
them to AI errors, regardless of whether they are driven by intentional non-use [21] or concerns
over AI accessibility and explainability [136], CHALET invites human coders to openly approach
such divergence as an opportunity for epistemic inquiry, asking if the misalignment signals human
oversight, AI/LLM limitations, or previously unarticulated concepts (T2), and to give LLM-produced
codes a “fair hearing". Analogously, instead of defaulting to LLM outputs as authoritative, CHALET
requires human coders to actively assess, interpret, and decide on these suggestions through
reflexive, dialogic engagement (T3) that preserves the critical agency of both human and LLM
coders (i.e., actants). A greater focus on how algorithmic factors (e.g., LLM sycophancy [186],
anthropomorphism) and individual elements (e.g., personality, task familiarity) [136] correlate with
human coders’ responses to disagreements with LLMs could produce implications that account
more for the design of human-LLM partnerships in qualitative analysis.

5.5.2 Moving beyond Human-centered Design in Qualitative Analysis. Our CHALET approach may
spark general discussions pertaining to HCI design principles that can be applied to systems
supporting qualitative analysis. Among these, human-centered design (HCD) [111] stands
out as particularly important to examine. HCD is a widely championed and adopted theoretical
framework in HCI, with its pronounced influence expanding into human-centered data science
[8], algorithm design [20], computing [15], and AI systems [37], and has guided how we regulate
and build artifacts, technologies, and AI agents that collaborate with human coders for decades
[77, 137]. Recent theoretical work, such as post-userism [23], however, invites frame reflection on
the assumptions underlying HCD, including the idea that humans exist as pre-given, stable subjects
who can articulate clear needs, and that our role as designers is to build AI systems that faithfully
serve those requirements, arguing instead that humans and technologies co-constitute one another
through ongoing intra-actions, with design processes actively shaping human/user identities per
se [25].
   Our CHALET methodology partly follows, instantiates, and adds value to the concept of “uncentered
design" [25] by emphasizing human–LLM disagreement and partnership. Rather than positioning
human coders as privileged overseers who direct AI tools to fulfill predetermined intentions, it
creates dynamics in which humans and LLMs mutually define and adjust to each other through
productive disagreement and negotiation – shifting from optimizing predefined user experiences
toward co-creating knowledge. Albeit promising, considerably more work will need to be done
to explore the impacts and potential risks of treating LLMs as independent qualitative coders on
equal footing – particularly given their unclear positionality and unknown provenance [183], in
contrast to human coders with explicit social locations and lived experiences. We touched on these
crucial questions preliminarily in Section 5.4.2.
Exploring the Human-LLM Synergy in Advancing Theory-driven Qualitative Analysis                 111:35


5.5.3 Informing the Design of LLM-integrated Qualitative-coding Tools. For systems implementing
theory-driven frameworks like CHALET, our paper could offer actionable design considerations that
extend beyond existing platforms such as NVivo, ATLAS.ti, MaxQDA, and AI-assisted coding tools
like CollabCoder [77], which primarily support data-driven qualitative coding. Specifically, future
UI/UX research may explore: 1) theory-integration interfaces that allow users to import, manage,
and update theoretical frameworks with visual indicators that distinguish theory-grounded codes
from data-derived ones; 2) disagreement-analysis panels that automatically flag human-LLM
coding discrepancies and provide categorization menus for users to classify disagreements as coding
errors or potential new theoretical constructs (T2); and 3) interactive review dashboards for
users to quickly review LLM-assigned codes (T1) and evaluate LLM-suggested coding schemes
(T3) through intuitive side-by-side comparison views.
   To provide a potential use scenario, consider the example in Section 5.4.1 of HCI researchers
studying "how people experience harm from AI systems": users could 1) upload participant messages
into the theory-integration interface and import their initial coding scheme (e.g., representational,
allocative, and interpersonal harms with codes like "verbal abuse" and "opportunity loss" tagged in
red as theory-grounded codes), then view LLM-generated deductive codes side-by-side with human
codes where discrepancies are highlighted with gray backgrounds; 2) use the disagreement-
analysis panel to classify these flagged messages through drop-down menus as "human coding
error," "LLM coding error," or "new code," with messages marked as "new code" automatically routed
to the next page; and 3) refine emergent codes in the interactive review dashboard where
LLMs generate data-derived codes (tagged in green) like "relational transgression," which users can
revise through prompts or manual editing, producing an expanded coding scheme that visually
distinguishes theory-grounded codes (e.g., "opportunity loss" under allocative harm) from data-
derived codes (e.g., "relational transgression" under interpersonal harm), with the entire coding
process logged for transparency.

5.5.4 Facilitating Psychological-dataset Creation. The CHALET methodology may inspire future
research in creating well-curated, real-world, domain-valuable datasets for training LLMs across
various domains. Our case study applies most directly to the psychology and social science fields.
As highlighted by previous research [55], investing in the creation of such datasets is a top priority
for the effective use of generative AI tools in HCI research. By using LLM-powered chatbots for data
collection, we showed how they can facilitate the acquisition of rich, cross-cultural conversational
data for training and testing LLMs in qualitative coding. The subsequent LLM-assisted coding
can help generate high-quality codes that meet the stringent standards for expert evaluation [55].
These dataset-creation steps also serve as a foundation for researchers to adopt our approach
to theory-guided qualitative analysis, paving the way for more robust and influential long-term
theoretical contributions to HCI studies.

5.6   Limitations and Future Research
Several limitations warrant discussion. First, our demonstration of CHALET through a single
case study using one LLM (i.e., GPT-4) may limit claims about its broader generalizability,
as the case-study findings are relatively descriptive and exploratory, and recent research indicates
that different LLMs can exhibit different predispositions and patterns in their responses [57]. A
natural extension of our work would be to test CHALET with other state-of-the-art LLMs like Claude,
across various research domains and theories, and through more systematic evaluation methods,
helping establish best practices for human-LLM qualitative analysis across platforms and model
versions.
111:36                                                                                                          et al.


   Second, socio-cultural factors present concerns at both the technological and empirical
levels. Given the nascent nature of LLM technology, LLMs may harbor and inadvertently
reinforce societal biases (e.g., historical, representational, and measurement biases [196]), cultural
stereotypes, and Western-centric perspectives [134]. These biases can manifest throughout the
machine-learning lifecycle, from data preparation to model building and implementation [196].
This is of particular concern when performing qualitative coding of socially and culturally sensitive
topics like stigma-related content, as LLMs might be trained on data that reflect predominantly
Western, liberal notions of mental health and other culturally bounded interpretations [52]. A
critical next step is to systematically benchmark whether, and to what extent, LLMs reproduce
biases like mental-illness stigma in their generated codes, particularly in cultural contexts beyond
the West. Besides, it is also worth noting that the participant pool of our case study, while
diverse, was not representative of any specific population. Because psychological constructs
are deeply influenced by socio-cultural factors [117], our case-study findings may not have captured
the full spectrum of culture-specific nuances. Future research could explore CHALET with more
culturally diverse participants to better understand how socio-cultural factors influence stigma-
related expression and human-LLM disagreement patterns.
   And third, there are important potential differences in the dynamics of human-human
and human-chatbot interactions. While qualitative data like interviews and focus groups allow
researchers to observe crucial paralinguistic and kinesic features [56], including prosodic variation,
proxemics, and gestural behavior, which can provide additional layers of meaning in understanding
stigmatizing attitudes, the absence of these non-verbal communicative elements in human-chatbot
interactions may limit our ability to fully capture the covert form of stigma. In addition, unlike
human interviews that capture immediate, spontaneous responses and natural speech patterns,
chatbot interactions introduce a temporal buffer that may affect how participants formulate and
express their thoughts. Although studies suggest that chatbots can facilitate meaningful self-
disclosure [123, 127], more research is needed to uncover differences in the expression of beliefs,
attitudes, and behavioral intentions between these interaction modes. A promising direction is to
explore chatbot designs incorporating audio and avatar features [194] to enhance tangibility and
immediacy and to better approximate the rich multimodal nature of human interviews for richer
qualitative-data collection.
   Finally, the message-level analysis of our approach may have overlooked important dynamics
that emerged and evolved in complex ways over the course of entire conversations. While
analyzing every individual message provides valuable qualitative insights, it may overlook how
stigmatizing attitudes evolve through turn-taking, how participants refine their views over the
course of the interaction, and how conversational elements, such as chatbot responses, previous
exchanges, and the overall discussion climate, shape the expression of stigma. Moving forward,
researchers would benefit from expanding the analysis to include aspects such as trajectories,
temporal patterns, intersubjectivity, and narrative development across full conversations [160].

Acknowledgments
Our research has been supported by the Ministry of Education, Singapore (A-8002610) and the
NUS Artificial Intelligence Institute (NAII) (A-8003879). We are grateful to all the reviewers for
their valuable comments and suggestions that helped improve this paper, and to all the participants
whose time and efforts made this research possible.

References
  [1] Kathryn A. Fuller, Kathryn A Morbitzer, Jacqueline M Zeeman, Adam M. Persky, Amanda C. Savage, and Jacqueline E
      McLaughlin. 2024. Exploring the use of ChatGPT to analyze student course evaluation comments. BMC Medical
Exploring the Human-LLM Synergy in Advancing Theory-driven Qualitative Analysis                                      111:37


      Education 24, 1 (2024), 423.
  [2] Anne Adams, Peter Lunt, and Paul Cairns. 2008. A qualititative approach to HCI research. (2008).
  [3] Icek Ajzen. 1985. From intentions to actions: A theory of planned behavior. In Action control: From cognition to
      behavior. Springer, 11–39.
  [4] Mohammed Aldeen, Joshua Luo, Ashley Lian, Venus Zheng, Allen Hong, Preethika Yetukuri, and Long Cheng. 2023.
      ChatGPT vs. Human Annotators: A Comprehensive Analysis of ChatGPT for Text Annotation. In 2023 International
      Conference on Machine Learning and Applications (ICMLA). IEEE, 602–609.
  [5] Ramez M. Alkoudmani, Guat See Ooi, and Mei Lan Tan. 2023. Implementing a chatbot on Facebook to reach and
      collect data from thousands of health care providers: PharmindBot as a case. Journal of the American Pharmacists
      Association 63, 5 (2023), 1634–1642.e3. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.japh.2023.06.007
  [6] Nisreen Ameen, Gagan Deep Sharma, Shlomo Tarba, Amar Rao, and Ritika Chopra. 2022. Toward advancing
      theory on creativity in marketing and artificial intelligence. Psychology & Marketing 39, 9 (2022), 1802–1825.
      https://doi.org/10.1002/mar.21699
  [7] Mostafa M. Amin, Erik Cambria, and Björn W. Schuller. 2023. Will Affective Computing Emerge From Foundation
      Models and General Artificial Intelligence? A First Evaluation of ChatGPT. IEEE Intelligent Systems 38, 2 (2023),
      15–23. https://doi.org/10.1109/MIS.2023.3254179
  [8] Cecilia Aragon, Shion Guha, Marina Kogan, Michael Muller, and Gina Neff. 2022. Human-centered data science: an
      introduction. MIT Press.
  [9] Moe Armstrong. 2003. Don’t Call Me Nuts! Coping With the Stigma of Mental Illness. Psychiatric Services 54, 1
      (2003), 116–116. https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.ps.54.1.116
 [10] Sabina Asensio-Cuesta, Vicent Blanes-Selva, J Alberto Conejero, Ana Frigola, Manuel G Portolés, Juan Francisco
      Merino-Torres, Matilde Rubio Almanza, Shabbir Syed-Abdul, Yu-Chuan (Jack) Li, Ruth Vilar-Mateo, Luis Fernandez-
      Luque, and Juan M García-Gómez. 2021. A User-Centered Chatbot (Wakamola) to Collect Linked Data in Population
      Networks to Support Studies of Overweight and Obesity Causes: Design and Pilot Study. JMIR Med Inform 9, 4 (14
      Apr 2021), e17503. https://doi.org/10.2196/17503
 [11] Julian Ashwin, Aditya Chhabra, and Vijayendra Rao. 2023. Using Large Language Models for Qualitative Analysis can
      Introduce Serious Bias. Policy Research Working Paper Series 10597. The World Bank. https://ideas.repec.org/p/wbk/
      wbrwps/10597.html
 [12] American Psychiatric Association. 2013. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition. Wash-
      ington, D.C. https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.books.9780890425596
 [13] Satyajeet Azad. 2023. The Effectiveness of GPT-4 as Financial News Annotator Versus Human Annotator in Improving
      the Accuracy and Performance of Sentiment Analysis. In International Conference on MAchine inTelligence for Research
      & Innovations. Springer, 105–119.
 [14] Aneesha Bakharia, Peter Bruza, Jim Watters, Bhuva Narayan, and Laurianne Sitbon. 2016. Interactive topic modeling
      for aiding qualitative content analysis. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM on Conference on Human Information Interaction
      and Retrieval. 213–222.
 [15] Liam Bannon. 2011. Reimagining HCI: toward a more human-centered perspective. interactions 18, 4 (2011), 50–57.
 [16] Muneera Bano, Didar Zowghi, and Jon Whittle. 2023. Exploring Qualitative Research Using LLMs. (2023). https:
      //doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2306.13298
 [17] Karen Barad. 2007. Meeting the universe halfway: Quantum physics and the entanglement of matter and meaning. duke
      university Press.
 [18] Amanda Barany, Nidhi Nasiar, Chelsea Porter, Andres Felipe Zambrano, Alexandra L Andres, Dara Bright, Mamta
      Shah, Xiner Liu, Sabrina Gao, Jiayi Zhang, et al. 2024. ChatGPT for Education Research: Exploring the Potential of
      Large Language Models for Qualitative Codebook Development. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
      in Education. Springer, 134–149.
 [19] S. Barber, P. C. Gronholm, S. Ahuja, N. Rüsch, and G. Thornicroft. 2020. Microaggressions towards people affected by
      mental health problems: a scoping review. Epidemiology and Psychiatric Sciences 29 (2020), e82. https://doi.org/10.
      1017/S2045796019000763
 [20] Eric PS Baumer. 2017. Toward human-centered algorithm design. Big Data & Society 4, 2 (2017), 2053951717718854.
 [21] Eric PS Baumer, Morgan G Ames, Jed R Brubaker, Jenna Burrell, and Paul Dourish. 2014. Refusing, limiting, departing:
      why we should study technology non-use. In CHI’14 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
      65–68.
 [22] Eric PS Baumer and Jed R Brubaker. 2017. Post-userism. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors
      in Computing Systems. 6291–6303.
 [23] Eric PS Baumer and Jed R Brubaker. 2017. Post-userism. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors
      in Computing Systems. 6291–6303.
111:38                                                                                                                    et al.


 [24] Eric PS Baumer, David Mimno, Shion Guha, Emily Quan, and Geri K Gay. 2017. Comparing grounded theory and
      topic modeling: Extreme divergence or unlikely convergence? Journal of the Association for Information Science and
      Technology 68, 6 (2017), 1397–1410.
 [25] Eric PS Baumer, Alex S Taylor, Jed R Brubaker, and Micki McGee. 2024. Algorithmic subjectivities. ACM Transactions
      on Computer-Human Interaction 31, 3 (2024), 1–34.
 [26] Erin Beneteau. 2020. Who Are You Asking?: Qualitative Methods for Involving AAC Users as Primary Research
      Participants. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Honolulu, HI, USA)
      (CHI ’20). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376883
 [27] Rimke Bijker, Stephanie S Merkouris, Nicki A Dowling, and Simone N Rodda. 2024. ChatGPT for Automated
      Qualitative Research: Content Analysis. Journal of Medical Internet Research 26 (2024), e59050.
 [28] Bart Bonikowski and Laura K Nelson. 2022. From ends to means: The promise of computational text analysis for
      theoretically driven sociological research. Sociological Methods & Research 51, 4 (2022), 1469–1483.
 [29] Mhairi Bowe, Debra Gray, Clifford Stevenson, Niamh McNamara, Juliet RH Wakefield, Blerina Kellezi, Iain Wilson,
      Michelle Cleveland, Elizabeth Mair, Moon Halder, et al. 2020. A social cure in the community: A mixed-method
      exploration of the role of social identity in the experiences and well-being of community volunteers. European
      Journal of Social Psychology 50, 7 (2020), 1523–1539.
 [30] Richard E. Boyatzis. 1998. Transforming Qualitative Information: Thematic Analysis and Code Development. Sage
      Publications, Inc, Thousand Oaks.
 [31] Ryan L Boyd and H Andrew Schwartz. 2021. Natural language analysis and the psychology of verbal behavior: The
      past, present, and future states of the field. Journal of Language and Social Psychology 40, 1 (2021), 21–41.
 [32] Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan,
      Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. 2020. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural
      information processing systems 33 (2020), 1877–1901.
 [33] Grzegorz Bryda and Damian Sadowski. 2024. From Words to Themes: AI-Powered Qualitative Data Coding and
      Analysis. In World Conference on Qualitative Research. Springer, 309–345.
 [34] Jason W Burton, Mari-Klara Stein, and Tina Blegind Jensen. 2020. A systematic review of algorithm aversion in
      augmented decision making. Journal of behavioral decision making 33, 2 (2020), 220–239.
 [35] Judith Butler and Gender Trouble. 1990. Feminism and the Subversion of Identity. Gender trouble 3, 1 (1990), 3–17.
 [36] James Cane, Denise O’Connor, and Susan Michie. 2012. Validation of the theoretical domains framework for use in
      behaviour change and implementation research. Implementation science 7 (2012), 1–17.
 [37] Tara Capel and Margot Brereton. 2023. What is human-centered about human-centered AI? A map of the research
      landscape. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems. 1–23.
 [38] Jacky Casas, Elena Mugellini, and Omar Abou Khaled. 2018. Food Diary Coaching Chatbot. In Proceedings of the 2018
      ACM International Joint Conference and 2018 International Symposium on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing and
      Wearable Computers (Singapore, Singapore). Association for Computing Machinery, 1676–1680. https://doi.org/10.
      1145/3267305.3274191
 [39] Partha Chatterjee. 2020. The nation and its fragments: Colonial and postcolonial histories. Princeton University Press.
 [40] Robert Chew, John Bollenbacher, Michael Wenger, Jessica Speer, and Annice Kim. 2023. LLM-Assisted Content
      Analysis: Using Large Language Models to Support Deductive Coding. (2023). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2306.
      14924
 [41] Bonnie Chinh, Himanshu Zade, Abbas Ganji, and Cecilia Aragon. 2019. Ways of Qualitative Coding: A Case
      Study of Four Strategies for Resolving Disagreements. In Extended Abstracts of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human
      Factors in Computing Systems (Glasgow, Scotland Uk) (CHI EA ’19). Association for Computing Machinery, 1–6.
      https://doi.org/10.1145/3290607.3312879
 [42] Shaan Chopra, Rachael Zehrung, Tamil Arasu Shanmugam, and Eun Kyoung Choe. 2021. Living with Uncertainty
      and Stigma: Self-Experimentation and Support-Seeking around Polycystic Ovary Syndrome. In Proceedings of the 2021
      CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Yokohama, Japan) (CHI ’21). Association for Computing
      Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 202, 18 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445706
 [43] Neta Kligler-Vilenchik Christian Baden and Moran Yarchi. 2020. Hybrid Content Analysis: Toward a Strategy for the
      Theory-driven, Computer-assisted Classification of Large Text Corpora. Communication Methods and Measures 14, 3
      (2020), 165–183. https://doi.org/10.1080/19312458.2020.1803247
 [44] Sherice N. Clarke, S Sushil, Katherine Dennis, Ung-Sang Lee, Andrea Gomoll, and Zaynab Gates. 2023. Developing
      Shared Ways of Seeing Data: The Perils and Possibilities of Achieving Intercoder Agreement. International Journal of
      Qualitative Methods 22 (2023), 16094069231160973. https://doi.org/10.1177/16094069231160973
 [45] David Collier and James Mahoney. 1996. Insights and Pitfalls: Selection Bias in Qualitative Research. World Politics
      49, 1 (1996), 56–91. https://doi.org/10.1353/wp.1996.0023
 [46] Patricia Hill Collins. 2022. Black feminist thought: Knowledge, consciousness, and the politics of empowerment. routledge.
Exploring the Human-LLM Synergy in Advancing Theory-driven Qualitative Analysis                                       111:39


 [47] Patrick W Corrigan. 2012. A toolkit for evaluating programs meant to erase the stigma of mental illness. Illinois
      Institute of Technology 10 (2012).
 [48] Patrick W. Corrigan, Fred E. Markowitz, Amy Watson, David Rowan, and Mary Ann Kubiak. 2003. An Attribution
      Model of Public Discrimination Towards Persons with Mental Illness. Journal of Health and Social Behavior 44, 2
      (2003), 162–179. http://www.jstor.org/stable/1519806
 [49] Kimberlé Crenshaw. 2013. Demarginalizing the intersection of race and sex: A black feminist critique of antidiscrimi-
      nation doctrine, feminist theory and antiracist politics. In Feminist legal theories. Routledge, 23–51.
 [50] Kevin Crowston, Xiaozhong Liu, and Eileen E Allen. 2010. Machine learning and rule-based automated coding of
      qualitative data. proceedings of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 47, 1 (2010), 1–2.
 [51] Shih-Chieh Dai, Aiping Xiong, and Lun-Wei Ku. 2023. LLM-in-the-loop: Leveraging Large Language Model for
      Thematic Analysis. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023, Houda Bouamor, Juan
      Pino, and Kalika Bali (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, Singapore, 9993–10001. https://doi.org/10.
      18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.669
 [52] Dipto Das, Shion Guha, Jed R Brubaker, and Bryan Semaan. 2024. The“Colonial Impulse" of Natural Language
      Processing: An Audit of Bengali Sentiment Analysis Tools and Their Identity-based Biases. In Proceedings of the 2024
      CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–18.
 [53] Stefano De Paoli. 2023. Performing an inductive thematic analysis of semi-structured interviews with a large language
      model: an exploration and provocation on the limits of the approach. Social Science Computer Review (7 Dec. 2023).
      https://doi.org/10.1177/08944393231220483
 [54] Michael S Deiner, Vlad Honcharov, Jiawei Li, Tim K Mackey, Travis C Porco, and Urmimala Sarkar. 2024. Large
      Language Models Can Enable Inductive Thematic Analysis of a Social Media Corpus in a Single Prompt: Human
      Validation Study. JMIR infodemiology 4, 1 (2024), e59641.
 [55] Dorottya Demszky, Diyi Yang, David S. Yeager, Christopher J. Bryan, Margarett Clapper, Susannah Chandhok,
      Johannes C. Eichstaedt, Cameron Hecht, Jeremy Jamieson, Meghann Johnson, Danielle Krettek-Cobb, Leslie Lai, Nirel
      JonesMitchell, Desmond C. Ong, Carol S. Dweck, James J. Gross, and James W. Pennebaker. 2023. Using large language
      models in psychology. Nature Reviews Psychology 2 (2023), 688–701. https://doi.org/10.1038/s44159-023-00241-5
 [56] Magdalena A Denham and Anthony John Onwuegbuzie. 2013. Beyond words: Using nonverbal communication data
      in research to enhance thick description and interpretation. International Journal of Qualitative Methods 12, 1 (2013),
      670–696.
 [57] Danica Dillion, Niket Tandon, Yuling Gu, and Kurt Gray. 2023. Can AI language models replace human participants?
      Trends in Cognitive Sciences 27, 7 (2023), 597–600.
 [58] Qingxiu Dong, Lei Li, Damai Dai, Ce Zheng, Zhiyong Wu, Baobao Chang, Xu Sun, Jingjing Xu, and Zhifang Sui. 2022.
      A survey on in-context learning. (2022). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2301.00234
 [59] Karen M Douglas and Robbie M Sutton. 2011. Constructive or cruel? Positive or patronizing? Reactions to expressions
      of positive and negative stereotypes of the mentally ill. British Journal of Psychology 102, 1 (2011), 97–107.
 [60] Paul Dourish and Scott D Mainwaring. 2012. Ubicomp’s colonial impulse. In Proceedings of the 2012 ACM conference
      on ubiquitous computing. 133–142.
 [61] Jakub Drápal, Hannes Westermann, and Jaromir Savelka. 2023. Using Large Language Models to Support Thematic
      Analysis in Empirical Legal Studies. (2023). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2310.18729
 [62] Edgar Dubourg, Valentin Thouzeau, and Nicolas Baumard. 2024. A step-by-step method for cultural annotation by
      LLMs. Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence 7 (2024), 1365508.
 [63] Zackary Okun Dunivin. 2024. Scalable Qualitative Coding with LLMs: Chain-of-Thought Reasoning Matches Human
      Performance in Some Hermeneutic Tasks. (2024). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2401.15170
 [64] Alicia Eads, Alexandra Schofield, Fauna Mahootian, David Mimno, and Rens Wilderom. 2021. Separating the wheat
      from the chaff: A topic and keyword-based procedure for identifying research-relevant text*. Poetics 86 (2021), 101527.
 [65] Mustafa Emirbayer and Ann Mische. 1998. What is agency? American journal of sociology 103, 4 (1998), 962–1023.
 [66] Wilmer Stalin Erazo, Germán Patricio Guerrero, Carlos Carrión Betancourt, and Iván Sánchez Salazar. 2020. Chatbot
      Implementation to Collect Data on Possible COVID-19 Cases and Release the Pressure on the Primary Health Care
      System. In 2020 11th IEEE Annual Information Technology, Electronics and Mobile Communication Conference (IEMCON).
      0302–0307. https://doi.org/10.1109/IEMCON51383.2020.9284846
 [67] Sindhu Kiranmai Ernala, Asra F. Rizvi, Michael L. Birnbaum, John M. Kane, and Munmun De Choudhury. 2017.
      Linguistic Markers Indicating Therapeutic Outcomes of Social Media Disclosures of Schizophrenia. Proc. ACM
      Hum.-Comput. Interact. 1, CSCW, Article 43 (dec 2017). https://doi.org/10.1145/3134678
 [68] Melike Yönder Ertem and Mehmet Karakaş. 2022. Validity and reliability study of the mental illness micro-aggression
      scale-perpetrator version. Archives of Psychiatric Nursing 41 (2022), 234–240. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apnu.2022.09.
      005
 [69] Frantz Fanon. 2023. Black skin, white masks. In Social theory re-wired. Routledge, 355–361.
111:40                                                                                                                 et al.


 [70] Jennifer Fereday and Eimear Muir-Cochrane. 2006. Demonstrating Rigor Using Thematic Analysis: A Hybrid
      Approach of Inductive and Deductive Coding and Theme Development. International Journal of Qualitative Methods
      5, 1 (2006), 80–92. https://doi.org/10.1177/160940690600500107
 [71] Jennifer Fereday and Eimear Muir-Cochrane. 2006. Demonstrating Rigor Using Thematic Analysis: A Hybrid
      Approach of Inductive and Deductive Coding and Theme Development. International Journal of Qualitative Methods
      5, 1 (2006), 80–92. https://doi.org/10.1177/160940690600500107
 [72] Jessica L. Feuston and Jed R. Brubaker. 2021. Putting Tools in Their Place: The Role of Time and Perspective in
      Human-AI Collaboration for Qualitative Analysis. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 5, CSCW2, Article 469 (oct
      2021). https://doi.org/10.1145/3479856
 [73] Robert J. Fisher. 1993. Social Desirability Bias and the Validity of Indirect Questioning. Journal of Consumer Research
      20, 2 (09 1993), 303–315. https://doi.org/10.1086/209351
 [74] Ziru Fu, Yu Cheng Hsu, Christian S Chan, Chaak Ming Lau, Joyce Liu, and Paul Siu Fai Yip. 2024. Efficacy of chatgpt
      in cantonese sentiment analysis: Comparative study. Journal of Medical Internet Research 26 (2024), e51069.
 [75] Yasir Gamieldien, Jennifer M. Case, and Andrew Katz. 2023. Advancing Qualitative Analysis: An Exploration of the
      Potential of Generative AI and NLP in Thematic Coding. (June 21 2023). http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4487768
 [76] Jie Gao, Kenny Tsu Wei Choo, Junming Cao, Roy Ka-Wei Lee, and Simon Perrault. 2023. CoAIcoder: Examining the
      Effectiveness of AI-Assisted Human-to-Human Collaboration in Qualitative Analysis. ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum.
      Interact. 31, 1 (nov 2023). https://doi.org/10.1145/3617362
 [77] Jie Gao, Yuchen Guo, Gionnieve Lim, Tianqin Zhang, Zheng Zhang, Toby Jia-Jun Li, and Simon Tangi Perrault.
      2024. CollabCoder: A Lower-barrier, Rigorous Workflow for Inductive Collaborative Qualitative Analysis with Large
      Language Models. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Honolulu, HI, USA)
      (CHI ’24). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 11. https://doi.org/10.1145/3613904.
      3642002
 [78] Simret Araya Gebreegziabher, Zheng Zhang, Xiaohang Tang, Yihao Meng, Elena L Glassman, and Toby Jia-Jun Li.
      2023. Patat: Human-ai collaborative qualitative coding with explainable interactive rule synthesis. In Proceedings of
      the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–19.
 [79] Sourojit Ghosh, Pranav Narayanan Venkit, Sanjana Gautam, Shomir Wilson, and Aylin Caliskan. 2024. Do Generative
      AI Models Output Harm while Representing Non-Western Cultures: Evidence from A Community-Centered Approach.
      In Proceedings of the AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society, Vol. 7. 476–489.
 [80] Arianna M. Gibson, Brittany L. Lindsay, and Andrew C. H. Szeto. 2023. Mental illness stigma and microaggressions:
      An experimental study of familiarity and relationship quality. Stigma and Health (2023). https://doi.org/10.1037/
      sah0000471 Advance online publication.
 [81] Fabrizio Gilardi, Meysam Alizadeh, and Maël Kubli. 2023. ChatGPT outperforms crowd workers for text-annotation
      tasks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 120, 30 (2023), e2305016120. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.
      2305016120
 [82] Lauren Gonzales, Kristin C. Davidoff, Joseph S. DeLuca, and Philip T. Yanos. 2015. The mental illness microaggressions
      scale-perpetrator version (MIMS-P): Reliability and validity. Psychiatry Research 229, 1 (2015), 120–125. https:
      //doi.org/10.1016/j.psychres.2015.07.061
 [83] Lauren Gonzales, Kristin C. Davidoff, Kevin L. Nadal, and Philip T. Yanos. 2015. Microaggressions experienced
      by persons with mental illnesses: An exploratory study. Psychiatric Rehabilitation Journal 38, 3 (2015), 234–241.
      https://doi.org/10.1037/prj0000096
 [84] Annabelle Gourlay, Gerry Mshana, Isolde Birdthistle, Grace Bulugu, Basia Zaba, and Mark Urassa. 2014. Using
      vignettes in qualitative research to explore barriers and facilitating factors to the uptake of prevention of mother-
      to-child transmission services in rural Tanzania: a critical analysis. BMC medical research methodology 14, 1 (2014),
      1–11.
 [85] Sandra Graham, Bernard Weiner, and Gail Sahar Zucker. 1997. An Attributional Analysis of Punishment Goals
      and Public Reactions to O. J. Simpson. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 23, 4 (1997), 331–346. https:
      //doi.org/10.1177/0146167297234001
 [86] Morgan Gray, Jaromir Savelka, Wesley Oliver, and Kevin Ashley. 2023. Can GPT Alleviate the Burden of Annotation?
      In Legal Knowledge and Information Systems. IOS Press, 157–166.
 [87] Timothy C Guetterman, Tammy Chang, Melissa DeJonckheere, Tanmay Basu, Elizabeth Scruggs, and VG Vinod
      Vydiswaran. 2018. Augmenting qualitative text analysis with natural language processing: methodological study.
      Journal of medical Internet research 20, 6 (2018), e231.
 [88] Yuting Guo, Anthony Ovadje, Mohammed Ali Al-Garadi, and Abeed Sarker. 2024. Evaluating large language models
      for health-related text classification tasks with public social media data. Journal of the American Medical Informatics
      Association 31, 10 (2024), 2181–2189.
Exploring the Human-LLM Synergy in Advancing Theory-driven Qualitative Analysis                                       111:41


 [89] Eradah O Hamad, Marie Y Savundranayagam, Jeffrey D Holmes, Elizabeth Anne Kinsella, and Andrew M Johnson.
      2016. Toward a Mixed-Methods Research Approach to Content Analysis in The Digital Age: The Combined Content-
      Analysis Model and its Applications to Health Care Twitter Feeds. J Med Internet Res 18, 3 (08 Mar 2016), e60.
      https://doi.org/10.2196/jmir.5391
 [90] Xu Han, Michelle Zhou, Matthew J. Turner, and Tom Yeh. 2021. Designing Effective Interview Chatbots: Automatic
      Chatbot Profiling and Design Suggestion Generation for Chatbot Debugging. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference
      on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Yokohama, Japan) (CHI ’21). Association for Computing Machinery, New
      York, NY, USA, Article 389, 15 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445569
 [91] Ainul Nadhirah Hanafiah and Tine Van Bortel. 2015. A qualitative exploration of the perspectives of mental health
      professionals on stigma and discrimination of mental illness in Malaysia. International Journal of Mental Health
      Systems 9 (2015), 10. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13033-015-0002-1
 [92] Alex Hanna, Remi Denton, Andrew Smart, and Jamila Smith-Loud. 2020. Towards a critical race methodology in
      algorithmic fairness. In Proceedings of the 2020 conference on fairness, accountability, and transparency. 501–512.
 [93] Gunnar Harboe and Elaine M. Huang. 2015. Real-World Affinity Diagramming Practices: Bridging the Paper-Digital
      Gap. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Seoul, Republic
      of Korea) (CHI ’15). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 95–104. https://doi.org/10.1145/
      2702123.2702561
 [94] Maram Hasanain, Fatema Ahmad, and Firoj Alam. 2024. Can GPT-4 Identify Propaganda? Annotation and Detection
      of Propaganda Spans in News Articles. In Proceedings of the 2024 Joint International Conference on Computational
      Linguistics, Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC-COLING 2024), Nicoletta Calzolari, Min-Yen Kan, Veronique
      Hoste, Alessandro Lenci, Sakriani Sakti, and Nianwen Xue (Eds.). ELRA and ICCL, Torino, Italia, 2724–2744. https:
      //aclanthology.org/2024.lrec-main.244
 [95] Xingwei He, Zhenghao Lin, Yeyun Gong, A-Long Jin, Hang Zhang, Chen Lin, Jian Jiao, Siu Ming Yiu, Nan Duan, and
      Weizhu Chen. 2024. AnnoLLM: Making Large Language Models to Be Better Crowdsourced Annotators. In Proceedings
      of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
      Technologies (Volume 6: Industry Track), Yi Yang, Aida Davani, Avi Sil, and Anoop Kumar (Eds.). Association for
      Computational Linguistics, Mexico City, Mexico, 165–190. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2024.naacl-industry.15
 [96] Zeyu He, Chieh-Yang Huang, Chien-Kuang Cornelia Ding, Shaurya Rohatgi, and Ting-Hao’Kenneth’ Huang. 2024. If
      in a Crowdsourced Data Annotation Pipeline, a GPT-4. (2024). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2402.16795
 [97] Michael Heseltine and Bernhard Clemm von Hohenberg. 2024. Large language models as a substitute for human
      experts in annotating political text. Research & Politics 11, 1 (2024), 20531680241236239.
 [98] Ashish Hingle, Andrew Katz, and Aditya Johri. 2023. Exploring NLP-Based Methods for Generating Engineering
      Ethics Assessment Qualitative Codebooks. In 2023 IEEE Frontiers in Education Conference (FIE). IEEE Computer
      Society, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1109/FIE58773.2023.10342985
 [99] Emma Hoes, Sacha Altay, and Juan Bermeo. 2023. Using ChatGPT to fight misinformation: ChatGPT nails 72% of
      12,000 verified claims. PsyArXiv. April 3 (2023).
[100] Andrew Gary Darwin Holmes. 2020. Researcher Positionality–A Consideration of Its Influence and Place in Qualitative
      Research–A New Researcher Guide. Shanlax International Journal of Education 8, 4 (2020), 1–10.
[101] Matt-Heun Hong, Lauren A Marsh, Jessica L Feuston, Janet Ruppert, Jed R Brubaker, and Danielle Albers Szafir. 2022.
      Scholastic: Graphical human-AI collaboration for inductive and interpretive text analysis. In Proceedings of the 35th
      Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology. 1–12.
[102] Chenyu Hou, Gaoxia Zhu, Juan Zheng, Lishan Zhang, Xiaoshan Huang, Tianlong Zhong, Shan Li, Hanxiang Du, and
      Chin Lee Ker. 2024. Prompt-based and Fine-tuned GPT Models for Context-Dependent and-Independent Deductive
      Coding in Social Annotation. In Proceedings of the 14th Learning Analytics and Knowledge Conference. 518–528.
[103] Chenyu Hou, Gaoxia Zhu, Juan Zheng, Lishan Zhang, Xiaoshan Huang, Tianlong Zhong, Shan Li, Hanxiang Du, and
      Chin Lee Ker. 2024. Prompt-based and Fine-tuned GPT Models for Context-Dependent and-Independent Deductive
      Coding in Social Annotation. In Proceedings of the 14th Learning Analytics and Knowledge Conference. 518–528.
[104] Fan Huang, Haewoon Kwak, and Jisun An. 2023. Is ChatGPT Better than Human Annotators? Potential and Limitations
      of ChatGPT in Explaining Implicit Hate Speech. In Companion Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2023 (Austin, TX,
      USA). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 294–297. https://doi.org/10.1145/3543873.3587368
[105] Jihyun K Hur, Joseph Heffner, Gloria W Feng, Jutta Joormann, and Robb B Rutledge. 2024. Language sentiment
      predicts changes in depressive symptoms. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 121, 39 (2024), e2321321121.
[106] Lilly Irani, Janet Vertesi, Paul Dourish, Kavita Philip, and Rebecca E Grinter. 2010. Postcolonial computing: a lens on
      design and development. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems. 1311–1320.
[107] Tunazzina Islam and Dan Goldwasser. 2024. Uncovering Latent Themes of Messaging on Social Media by Integrating
      LLMs: A Case Study on Climate Campaigns. (2024). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2403.10707
111:42                                                                                                                  et al.


[108] Jacinta Jardine, Camille Nadal, Sarah Robinson, Angel Enrique, Marcus Hanratty, and Gavin Doherty. 2024. Between
      Rhetoric and Reality: Real-world Barriers to Uptake and Early Engagement in Digital Mental Health Interventions.
      ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact. 31, 2, Article 27 (feb 2024), 59 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3635472
[109] Jialun Aaron Jiang, Kandrea Wade, Casey Fiesler, and Jed R. Brubaker. 2021. Supporting Serendipity: Opportunities
      and Challenges for Human-AI Collaboration in Qualitative Analysis. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 5, CSCW1,
      Article 94 (apr 2021). https://doi.org/10.1145/3449168
[110] Eunkyung Jo, Myeonghan Ryu, Georgia Kenderova, Samuel So, Bryan Shapiro, Alexandra Papoutsaki, and Daniel A
      Epstein. 2022. Designing flexible longitudinal regimens: Supporting clinician planning for discontinuation of
      psychiatric drugs. In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–17.
[111] Natasha N Jones. 2016. Narrative inquiry in human-centered design: Examining silence and voice to promote social
      justice in design scenarios. Journal of technical writing and communication 46, 4 (2016), 471–492.
[112] Jamshed Kaikaus, Haoen Li, and Robert J Brunner. 2023. Humans vs. ChatGPT: Evaluating Annotation Methods for
      Financial Corpora. In 2023 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (BigData). IEEE, 2831–2838.
[113] Awais Hameed Khan, Hiruni Kegalle, Rhea D’Silva, Ned Watt, Daniel Whelan-Shamy, Lida Ghahremanlou, and
      Liam Magee. 2024. Automating Thematic Analysis: How LLMs Analyse Controversial Topics. arXiv preprint
      arXiv:2405.06919 (2024).
[114] Taewan Kim, Mintra Ruensuk, and Hwajung Hong. 2020. In Helping a Vulnerable Bot, You Help Yourself: Designing a
      Social Bot as a Care-Receiver to Promote Mental Health and Reduce Stigma. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference
      on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Honolulu, HI, USA) (CHI ’20). Association for Computing Machinery, 1–13.
      https://doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376743
[115] Elisabeth Kirsten, Annalina Buckmann, Abraham Mhaidli, and Steffen Becker. 2024. Decoding Complexity: Exploring
      Human-AI Concordance in Qualitative Coding. (2024). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2403.06607
[116] Dan M Kotliar. 2020. Data orientalism: on the algorithmic construction of the non-Western other. Theory and Society
      49, 5 (2020), 919–939.
[117] Anne C Krendl and Bernice A Pescosolido. 2020. Countries and cultural differences in the stigma of mental illness:
      the east–west divide. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology 51, 2 (2020), 149–167.
[118] Taja Kuzman, Igor Mozetič, and Nikola Ljubešić. 2023. Automatic genre identification for robust enrichment of
      massive text collections: Investigation of classification methods in the era of large language models. Machine Learning
      and Knowledge Extraction 5, 3 (2023), 1149–1175.
[119] Michelle S Lam, Janice Teoh, James A Landay, Jeffrey Heer, and Michael S Bernstein. 2024. Concept Induction:
      Analyzing Unstructured Text with High-Level Concepts Using LLooM. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human
      Factors in Computing Systems. 1–28.
[120] Jonathan Lazar, Jinjuan Heidi Feng, and Harry Hochheiser. 2017. Chapter 11 - Analyzing qualitative data. In Research
      Methods in Human Computer Interaction (Second Edition) (second edition ed.), Jonathan Lazar, Jinjuan Heidi Feng, and
      Harry Hochheiser (Eds.). Morgan Kaufmann, Boston, 299–327. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-805390-4.00011-X
[121] V Vien Lee, Stephanie CC van der Lubbe, Lay Hoon Goh, and Jose Maria Valderas. 2024. Harnessing ChatGPT for
      Thematic Analysis: Are We Ready? Journal of Medical Internet Research 26 (2024), e54974.
[122] Yi-Chieh Lee, Yichao Cui, Jack Jamieson, Wayne Fu, and Naomi Yamashita. 2023. Exploring Effects of Chatbot-based
      Social Contact on Reducing Mental Illness Stigma. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
      Computing Systems (Hamburg, Germany) (CHI ’23). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
      Article 488, 16 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3544548.3581384
[123] Yi-Chieh Lee, Naomi Yamashita, Yun Huang, and Wai Fu. 2020. "I Hear You, I Feel You": Encouraging Deep Self-
      Disclosure through a Chatbot. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
      (Honolulu, HI, USA) (CHI ’20). 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376175
[124] William Leeson, Adam Resnick, Daniel Alexander, and John Rovers. 2019. Natural Language Processing (NLP) in
      Qualitative Public Health Research: A Proof of Concept Study. International Journal of Qualitative Methods 18 (2019),
      1609406919887021. https://doi.org/10.1177/1609406919887021
[125] Robert P Lennon, Robbie Fraleigh, Lauren J Van Scoy, Aparna Keshaviah, Xindi C Hu, Bethany L Snyder, Erin L
      Miller, William A Calo, Aleksandra E Zgierska, and Christopher Griffin. 2021. Developing and testing an automated
      qualitative assistant (AQUA) to support qualitative analysis. Family Medicine and Community Health 9, Suppl 1 (2021).
      https://doi.org/10.1136/fmch-2021-001287
[126] Ang Li, Xiaoxiao Huang, Dongdong Jiao, Bridianne O’Dea, Tingshao Zhu, and Helen Christensen. 2018. An analysis
      of stigma and suicide literacy in responses to suicides broadcast on social media. Asia-Pacific Psychiatry 10, 1 (2018),
      e12314. https://doi.org/10.1111/appy.12314
[127] Chi-Hsun Li, Su-Fang Yeh, Tang-Jie Chang, Meng-Hsuan Tsai, Ken Chen, and Yung-Ju Chang. 2020. A Conversation
      Analysis of Non-Progress and Coping Strategies with a Banking Task-Oriented Chatbot. In Proceedings of the 2020
      CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Honolulu, HI, USA) (CHI ’20). Association for Computing
Exploring the Human-LLM Synergy in Advancing Theory-driven Qualitative Analysis                                         111:43


      Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376209
[128] Jingshu Li, Yitian Yang, Q Vera Liao, Junti Zhang, and Yi-Chieh Lee. 2025. As Confidence Aligns: Understanding the
      Effect of AI Confidence on Human Self-confidence in Human-AI Decision Making. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI
      Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–16.
[129] Jasy Suet Yan Liew, Nancy McCracken, Shichun Zhou, and Kevin Crowston. 2014. Optimizing features in active
      machine learning for complex qualitative content analysis. In Proceedings of the ACL 2014 Workshop on Language
      Technologies and Computational Social Science. 44–48.
[130] Bruce G. Link, Lawrence H. Yang, Jo C. Phelan, and Pamela Y. Collins. 2004. Measuring Mental Illness Stigma.
      Schizophrenia Bulletin 30, 3 (01 2004), 511–541. https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordjournals.schbul.a007098
[131] Chandreen R Liyanage, Ravi Gokani, and Vijay Mago. 2024. GPT-4 as an X data annotator: Unraveling its performance
      on a stance classification task. PloS one 19, 8 (2024), e0307741.
[132] Saríah Lopez-Fierro and Ha Nguyen. 2024. Making Human-AI Contributions Transparent in Qualitative Coding. In
      Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning-CSCL 2024, pp. 3-10.
      International Society of the Learning Sciences.
[133] Yao Lu, Max Bartolo, Alastair Moore, Sebastian Riedel, and Pontus Stenetorp. 2022. Fantastically Ordered Prompts
      and Where to Find Them: Overcoming Few-Shot Prompt Order Sensitivity. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual
      Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), Smaranda Muresan, Preslav Nakov,
      and Aline Villavicencio (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, Dublin, Ireland, 8086–8098. https:
      //doi.org/10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.556
[134] Weicheng Ma, Henry Scheible, Brian Wang, Goutham Veeramachaneni, Pratim Chowdhary, Alan Sun, Andrew
      Koulogeorge, Lili Wang, Diyi Yang, and Soroush Vosoughi. 2023. Deciphering stereotypes in pre-trained language
      models. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. 11328–11345.
[135] Lany Laguna Maceda, Jennifer Laraya Llovido, Miles Biago Artiaga, and Mideth Balawiswis Abisado. 2023. Classifying
      Sentiments on Social Media Texts: A GPT-4 Preliminary Study. In Proceedings of the 2023 7th International Conference
      on Natural Language Processing and Information Retrieval. 19–24.
[136] Hasan Mahmud, AKM Najmul Islam, Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed, and Kari Smolander. 2022. What influences algorithmic
      decision-making? A systematic literature review on algorithm aversion. Technological Forecasting and Social Change
      175 (2022), 121390.
[137] Megh Marathe and Kentaro Toyama. 2018. Semi-Automated Coding for Qualitative Research: A User-Centered
      Inquiry and Initial Prototypes. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
      (Montreal QC, Canada) (CHI ’18). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–12. https://doi.org/
      10.1145/3173574.3173922
[138] Mark J. Martinko, Paul Harvey, and Scott C. Douglas. 2007. The role, function, and contribution of attribution theory
      to leadership: A review. The Leadership Quarterly 18, 6 (2007), 561–585. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2007.09.004
      The Leadership Quarterly Yearly Review of Leadership.
[139] Steven Marwaha and Gill Livingston. 2002. Stigma, racism or choice. Why do depressed ethnic elders avoid
      psychiatrists? Journal of Affective Disorders 72, 3 (2002), 257–265. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0165-0327(01)00470-0
[140] Walter S Mathis, Sophia Zhao, Nicholas Pratt, Jeremy Weleff, and Stefano De Paoli. 2024. Inductive thematic analysis
      of healthcare qualitative interviews using open-source large language models: How does it compare to traditional
      methods? Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 255 (2024), 108356.
[141] Nora McDonald, Sarita Schoenebeck, and Andrea Forte. 2019. Reliability and inter-rater reliability in qualitative
      research: Norms and guidelines for CSCW and HCI practice. Proceedings of the ACM on human-computer interaction
      3, CSCW (2019), 1–23.
[142] Han Meng. 2025. Leveraging Human-AI Partnership Approach to Unravel Human Psychological Constructs. In
      Proceedings of the Extended Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–6.
[143] Han Meng, Yancan Chen, Yunan Li, Yitian Yang, Jungup Lee, Renwen Zhang, and Yi-Chieh Lee. 2025. What is Stigma
      Attributed to? A Theory-Grounded, Expert-Annotated Interview Corpus for Demystifying Mental-Health Stigma.
      In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers).
      Association for Computational Linguistics, Vienna, Austria.
[144] Han Meng, Renwen Zhang, Ganyi Wang, Yitian Yang, Peinuan Qin, Jungup Lee, and Yi-Chieh Lee. 2025. Decon-
      structing depression stigma: Integrating ai-driven data collection and analysis with causal knowledge graphs. In
      Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–21.
[145] Lisa Messeri and MJ Crockett. 2024. Artificial intelligence and illusions of understanding in scientific research. Nature
      627, 8002 (2024), 49–58.
[146] Matthew B Miles. 1979. Qualitative data as an attractive nuisance: The problem of analysis. Administrative science
      quarterly 24, 4 (1979), 590–601.
111:44                                                                                                                  et al.


[147] Piotr Mirowski, Kory W. Mathewson, Jaylen Pittman, and Richard Evans. 2023. Co-Writing Screenplays and Theatre
      Scripts with Language Models: Evaluation by Industry Professionals. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on
      Human Factors in Computing Systems (Hamburg, Germany) (CHI ’23). Association for Computing Machinery, New
      York, NY, USA, Article 355, 34 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3544548.3581225
[148] David L Morgan. 2023. Exploring the use of artificial intelligence for qualitative data analysis: The case of ChatGPT.
      International journal of qualitative methods 22 (2023), 16094069231211248.
[149] Michael Muller, Shion Guha, Eric P.S. Baumer, David Mimno, and N. Sadat Shami. 2016. Machine Learning and
      Grounded Theory Method: Convergence, Divergence, and Combination. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Interna-
      tional Conference on Supporting Group Work (Sanibel Island, Florida, USA) (GROUP ’16). Association for Computing
      Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 3–8. https://doi.org/10.1145/2957276.2957280
[150] Michael Muthukrishna and Joseph Henrich. 2019. A problem in theory. Nature Human Behaviour 3, 3 (2019), 221–229.
[151] Arbi Haza Nasution and Aytug Onan. 2024. ChatGPT Label: Comparing the Quality of Human-Generated and
      LLM-Generated Annotations in Low-resource Language NLP Tasks. IEEE Access (2024).
[152] Laura K. Nelson. 2020. Computational Grounded Theory: A Methodological Framework. Sociological Methods &
      Research 49, 1 (2020), 3–42. https://doi.org/10.1177/0049124117729703
[153] Laura K. Nelson, Derek Burk, Marcel Knudsen, and Leslie McCall. 2021. The Future of Coding: A Comparison of
      Hand-Coding and Three Types of Computer-Assisted Text Analysis Methods. Sociological Methods & Research 50, 1
      (2021), 202–237. https://doi.org/10.1177/0049124118769114
[154] Kimberly A. Neuendorf. 2017. An Integrative Approach to Content Analysis (second ed.). SAGE Publications, Inc.,
      36–69. https://doi.org/10.4135/9781071802878
[155] Kien Nguyen-Trung. 2024. ChatGPT in Thematic Analysis: Can AI become a research assistant in qualitative research?
      OSF Preprint (2024).
[156] Erik C Nook, Jessica L Schleider, and Leah H Somerville. 2017. A linguistic signature of psychological distancing in
      emotion regulation. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 146, 3 (2017), 337.
[157] Arkadiusz Nowacki, Wojciech Sitek, and Henryk Rybiński. 2024. LLMental: Classification of Mental Disorders with
      Large Language Models. In International Symposium on Methodologies for Intelligent Systems. Springer, 35–44.
[158] Ryan M Omizo. 2024. Automating Research in Business and Technical Communication: Large Language Models as
      Qualitative Coders. Journal of Business and Technical Communication (2024), 10506519241239927.
[159] Wei Jie Ong, Shazana Shahwan, Chong Min Janrius Goh, Gregory Tee Hng Tan, Siow Ann Chong, and Mythily
      Subramaniam. 2020. Daily Encounters of Mental Illness Stigma and Individual Strategies to Reduce Stigma –
      Perspectives of People With Mental Illness. Frontiers in Psychology 11 (2020). https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.590844
[160] Henna Paakki, Heidi Vepsäläinen, Antti Salovaara, and Bushra Zafar. 2024. Detecting covert disruptive behavior in
      online interaction by analyzing conversational features and norm violations. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human
      Interaction 31, 2 (2024), 1–43.
[161] Angelina Parfenova. 2024. Automating the Information Extraction from Semi-Structured Interview Transcripts. In
      Companion Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2024. 983–986.
[162] Mike Perkins and Jasper Roe. 2024. The use of Generative AI in qualitative analysis: Inductive thematic analysis with
      ChatGPT. Journal of Applied Learning and Teaching 7, 1 (2024).
[163] Heinrich Peters and Sandra C Matz. 2024. Large language models can infer psychological dispositions of social media
      users. PNAS nexus 3, 6 (2024), pgae231.
[164] Nishchal Prasad, Mohand Boughanem, and Taoufiq Dkaki. 2024. Exploring Large Language Models and Hierarchical
      Frameworks for Classification of Large Unstructured Legal Documents. In European Conference on Information
      Retrieval. Springer, 221–237.
[165] James Prather, Brent N. Reeves, Paul Denny, Brett A. Becker, Juho Leinonen, Andrew Luxton-Reilly, Garrett Powell,
      James Finnie-Ansley, and Eddie Antonio Santos. 2023. “It’s Weird That it Knows What I Want”: Usability and
      Interactions with Copilot for Novice Programmers. ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact. 31, 1, Article 4 (nov 2023),
      31 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3617367
[166] Kevin Proudfoot. 2023. Inductive/deductive hybrid thematic analysis in mixed methods research. Journal of Mixed
      Methods Research 17, 3 (2023), 308–326.
[167] Ghulam Jilani Quadri, Arran Zeyu Wang, Zhehao Wang, Jennifer Adorno, Paul Rosen, and Danielle Albers Szafir. 2024.
      Do You See What I See? A Qualitative Study Eliciting High-Level Visualization Comprehension. In Proceedings of the
      CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Honolulu, HI, USA) (CHI ’24). Association for Computing
      Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 204. https://doi.org/10.1145/3613904.3642813
[168] Giridhar Kaushik Ramachandran, Yujuan Fu, Bin Han, Kevin Lybarger, Nic Dobbins, Ozlem Uzuner, and Meliha
      Yetisgen. 2023. Prompt-based Extraction of Social Determinants of Health Using Few-shot Learning. In Proceedings
      of the 5th Clinical Natural Language Processing Workshop, Tristan Naumann, Asma Ben Abacha, Steven Bethard,
      Kirk Roberts, and Anna Rumshisky (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, Toronto, Canada, 385–393.
Exploring the Human-LLM Synergy in Advancing Theory-driven Qualitative Analysis                                       111:45


      https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.clinicalnlp-1.41
[169] Steve Rathje, Dan-Mircea Mirea, Ilia Sucholutsky, Raja Marjieh, Claire E. Robertson, and Jay J. Van Bavel. 2024. GPT
      is an effective tool for multilingual psychological text analysis. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 121,
      34 (2024), e2308950121. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2308950121
[170] Kamalakkannan Ravi, Adan Ernesto Vela, Elizabeth Jenaway, and Steven Windisch. 2023. Exploring Multi-Level
      Threats in Telegram Data with AI-Human Annotation: A Preliminary Study. In 2023 International Conference on
      Machine Learning and Applications (ICMLA). IEEE, 1520–1527.
[171] Michael V. Reiss. 2023. Testing the Reliability of ChatGPT for Text Annotation and Classification: A Cautionary
      Remark. (2023). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2304.11085
[172] Jungwook Rhim, Minji Kwak, Yeaeun Gong, and Gahgene Gweon. 2022. Application of humanization to survey
      chatbots: Change in chatbot perception, interaction experience, and survey data quality. Computers in Human
      Behavior 126 (2022), 107034. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2021.107034
[173] K. Andrew R. Richards and Michael A. Hemphill. 2022. A Practical Guide to Collaborative Qualitative Data Analysis.
      Journal of Teaching in Physical Education 37, 2 (2022), 225 – 231. https://doi.org/10.1123/jtpe.2017-0084
[174] Tim Rietz and Alexander Maedche. 2020. Towards the Design of an Interactive Machine Learning System for
      Qualitative Coding.. In ICIS.
[175] Tim Rietz and Alexander Maedche. 2021. Cody: An AI-Based System to Semi-Automate Coding for Qualitative
      Research. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Yokohama, Japan) (CHI
      ’21). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 394. https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445591
[176] Laura Weiss Roberts. 2002. Ethics and Mental Illness Research. Psychiatric Clinics of North America 25, 3 (2002),
      A525–A545.
[177] Hamidreza Rouzegar and Masoud Makrehchi. 2024. Enhancing Text Classification through LLM-Driven Active
      Learning and Human Annotation. In Proceedings of The 18th Linguistic Annotation Workshop (LAW-XVIII), Sophie
      Henning and Manfred Stede (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, St. Julians, Malta, 98–111. https:
      //aclanthology.org/2024.law-1.10
[178] Edward W Said. 1977. Orientalism. The Georgia Review 31, 1 (1977), 162–206.
[179] Johnny Saldana. 2016. The Coding Manual for Qualitative Researchers (3rd ed.). Sage Publications, Inc, London.
[180] Giuseppe Sartori and Graziella Orrù. 2023. Language models and psychological sciences. Frontiers in Psychology 14
      (2023), 1279317.
[181] Corina Sas, Steve Whittaker, and John Zimmerman. 2016. Design for Rituals of Letting Go: An Embodiment
      Perspective on Disposal Practices Informed by Grief Therapy. ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact. 23, 4, Article 21
      (aug 2016), 37 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/2926714
[182] Jaromir Savelka and Kevin D Ashley. 2023. The unreasonable effectiveness of large language models in zero-shot
      semantic annotation of legal texts. Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence 6 (2023), 1279794.
[183] Hope Schroeder, Marianne Aubin Le Quéré, Casey Randazzo, David Mimno, and Sarita Schoenebeck. 2025. Large
      Language Models in Qualitative Research: Uses, Tensions, and Intentions. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference
      on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–17.
[184] Shalom H Schwartz. 2012. An overview of the Schwartz theory of basic values. Online readings in Psychology and
      Culture 2, 1 (2012), 11.
[185] Joel Sebastian and Deborah Richards. 2017. Changing stigmatizing attitudes to mental health via education and
      contact with embodied conversational agents. Computers in Human Behavior 73 (2017), 479–488. https://doi.org/10.
      1016/j.chb.2017.03.071
[186] Mrinank Sharma, Meg Tong, Tomasz Korbak, David Duvenaud, Amanda Askell, Samuel R Bowman, Esin DURMUS,
      Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Scott R Johnston, Shauna M Kravec, et al. [n. d.]. Towards Understanding Sycophancy in
      Language Models. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations.
[187] Renee Shelby, Shalaleh Rismani, Kathryn Henne, AJung Moon, Negar Rostamzadeh, Paul Nicholas, N’Mah Yilla-
      Akbari, Jess Gallegos, Andrew Smart, Emilio Garcia, et al. 2023. Sociotechnical harms of algorithmic systems: Scoping
      a taxonomy for harm reduction. In Proceedings of the 2023 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society. 723–741.
[188] Leo A Siiman, Meeli Rannastu-Avalos, Johanna Pöysä-Tarhonen, Päivi Häkkinen, and Margus Pedaste. 2023. Oppor-
      tunities and challenges for AI-assisted qualitative data analysis: An example from collaborative problem-solving
      discourse data. In International Conference on Innovative Technologies and Learning. Springer, 87–96.
[189] Satpreet Harcharan Singh, Kevin Jiang, Kanchan Bhasin, Ashutosh Sabharwal, Nidal Moukaddam, and Ankit B Patel.
      2024. RACER: An LLM-powered Methodology for Scalable Analysis of Semi-structured Mental Health Interviews.
      arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.02656 (2024).
[190] Ravi Sinha, Idris Solola, Ha Nguyen, Hillary Swanson, and LuEttaMae Lawrence. 2024. The Role of Generative AI in
      Qualitative Research: GPT-4’s Contributions to a Grounded Theory Analysis. In Proceedings of the Symposium on
      Learning, Design and Technology. 17–25.
111:46                                                                                                                 et al.


[191] Robert Soden, Austin Toombs, and Michaelanne Thomas. 2024. Evaluating interpretive research in HCI. Interactions
      31, 1 (2024), 38–42.
[192] Laura G Stull, John H McGrew, Michelle P Salyers, and Leslie Ashburn-Nardo. 2013. Implicit and explicit stigma
      of mental illness: Attitudes in an evidence-based practice. The Journal of nervous and mental disease 201, 12 (2013),
      1072–1079.
[193] Derald Wing Sue, Christina M Capodilupo, Gina C Torino, Jennifer M Bucceri, Aisha Holder, Kevin L Nadal, and Marta
      Esquilin. 2007. Racial microaggressions in everyday life: implications for clinical practice. American psychologist 62,
      4 (2007), 271.
[194] Hung-Yue Suen and Kuo-En Hung. 2023. Building trust in automatic video interviews using various AI interfaces:
      Tangibility, immediacy, and transparency. Computers in Human Behavior 143 (2023), 107713.
[195] Xiaofei Sun, Xiaoya Li, Jiwei Li, Fei Wu, Shangwei Guo, Tianwei Zhang, and Guoyin Wang. 2023. Text Classification
      via Large Language Models. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023, Houda Bouamor,
      Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, Singapore, 8990–9005. https://doi.org/
      10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.603
[196] Harini Suresh and John Guttag. 2021-10-05. A Framework for Understanding Sources of Harm throughout the
      Machine Learning Life Cycle. In Equity and Access in Algorithms, Mechanisms, and Optimization (– NY USA). ACM,
      1–9. https://doi.org/10.1145/3465416.3483305
[197] Jon Swain. 2018. A hybrid approach to thematic analysis in qualitative research: Using a practical example. Sage
      research methods (2018).
[198] Robert H Tai, Lillian R Bentley, Xin Xia, Jason M Sitt, Sarah C Fankhauser, Ana M Chicas-Mosier, and Barnas G
      Monteith. 2024. An Examination of the Use of Large Language Models to Aid Analysis of Textual Data. International
      Journal of Qualitative Methods 23 (2024), 16094069241231168.
[199] Mariska E te Pas, Werner G M M Rutten, R Arthur Bouwman, and Marc P Buise. 2020. User Experience of a Chatbot
      Questionnaire Versus a Regular Computer Questionnaire: Prospective Comparative Study. JMIR Med Inform 8, 12 (7
      Dec 2020), e21982. https://doi.org/10.2196/21982
[200] Ramya Tekumalla and Juan M Banda. 2023. Leveraging Large Language Models and Weak Supervision for Social
      Media data annotation: an evaluation using COVID-19 self-reported vaccination tweets. In International Conference
      on Human-Computer Interaction. Springer, 356–366.
[201] Maya Grace Torii, Takahito Murakami, and Yoichi Ochiai. 2024. Expanding Horizons in HCI Research Through
      LLM-Driven Qualitative Analysis. (2024). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2401.04138
[202] Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay Bashlykov,
      Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher, Cristian Canton Ferrer, Moya Chen,
      Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernandes, Jeremy Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller, Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami,
      Naman Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn, Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian
      Khabsa, Isabel Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya Lee,
      Diana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Martinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra, Igor Molybog, Yixin
      Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizenstein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi, Alan Schelten, Ruan Silva, Eric Michael
      Smith, Ranjan Subramanian, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Binh Tang, Ross Taylor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin
      Xu, Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen Zhang, Angela Fan, Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurelien Rodriguez,
      Robert Stojnic, Sergey Edunov, and Thomas Scialom. 2023. Llama 2: Open Foundation and Fine-Tuned Chat Models.
      https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2307.09288
[203] Sarah J Tracy. 2024. Qualitative research methods: Collecting evidence, crafting analysis, communicating impact. John
      Wiley & Sons.
[204] Aleksei Turobov, Diane Coyle, and Verity Harding. 2024. Using ChatGPT for Thematic Analysis. arXiv preprint
      arXiv:2405.08828 (2024).
[205] Petter Törnberg. 2024. Best Practices for Text Annotation with Large Language Models. (2024). https://doi.org/10.
      48550/arXiv.2402.05129
[206] Hande Aka Uymaz and Senem Kumova Metin. 2023. Collaborative Emotion Annotation: Assessing the Intersection
      of Human and AI Performance with GPT Models.. In KDIR. 298–305.
[207] Quentin Vantrepotte, Bruno Berberian, Marine Pagliari, and Valérian Chambon. 2022. Leveraging human agency to
      improve confidence and acceptability in human-machine interactions. Cognition 222 (2022), 105020.
[208] Rama Adithya Varanasi, Aditya Vashistha, and Nicola Dell. 2021. Tag a Teacher: A Qualitative Analysis of WhatsApp-
      Based Teacher Networks in Low-Income Indian Schools. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors
      in Computing Systems (Yokohama, Japan) (CHI ’21). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
      Article 560. https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445221
[209] Lucy L. Purgason W. Bradley McKibben, Rochelle Cade and Edward Wahesh. 2022. How to Conduct a Deductive
      Content Analysis in Counseling Research. Counseling Outcome Research and Evaluation 13, 2 (2022), 156–168.
Exploring the Human-LLM Synergy in Advancing Theory-driven Qualitative Analysis                                     111:47


      https://doi.org/10.1080/21501378.2020.1846992
[210] Mark Warner, Juan F. Maestre, Jo Gibbs, Chia-Fang Chung, and Ann Blandford. 2019. Signal Appropriation of Explicit
      HIV Status Disclosure Fields in Sex-Social Apps used by Gay and Bisexual Men. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI
      Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Glasgow, Scotland Uk) (CHI ’19). Association for Computing
      Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–15. https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300922
[211] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou, et al. 2022.
      Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in neural information processing
      systems 35 (2022), 24824–24837.
[212] Sijia Xiao, Shagun Jhaver, and Niloufar Salehi. 2023. Addressing Interpersonal Harm in Online Gaming Communities:
      The Opportunities and Challenges for a Restorative Justice Approach. ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact. 30, 6,
      Article 83 (sep 2023), 36 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3603625
[213] Ziang Xiao, Xingdi Yuan, Q. Vera Liao, Rania Abdelghani, and Pierre-Yves Oudeyer. 2023. Supporting Qualitative
      Analysis with Large Language Models: Combining Codebook with GPT-3 for Deductive Coding. In Companion
      Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces (Sydney, NSW, Australia) (IUI ’23
      Companion). Association for Computing Machinery, 75–78. https://doi.org/10.1145/3581754.3584136
[214] Ziang Xiao, Michelle X. Zhou, Wenxi Chen, Huahai Yang, and Changyan Chi. 2020. If I Hear You Correctly:
      Building and Evaluating Interview Chatbots with Active Listening Skills. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on
      Human Factors in Computing Systems (Honolulu, HI, USA) (CHI ’20). Association for Computing Machinery, 1–14.
      https://doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376131
[215] Wen Xu and Katina Zammit. 2020. Applying thematic analysis to education: A hybrid approach to interpreting data
      in practitioner research. International journal of qualitative methods 19 (2020), 1609406920918810.
[216] Jasy Liew Suet Yan, Nancy McCracken, and Kevin Crowston. 2014. Semi-automatic content analysis of qualitative
      data. IConference 2014 Proceedings (2014).
[217] Lixiang Yan, Vanessa Echeverria, Gloria Milena Fernandez-Nieto, Yueqiao Jin, Zachari Swiecki, Linxuan Zhao, Dragan
      Gašević, and Roberto Martinez-Maldonado. 2024. Human-AI Collaboration in Thematic Analysis using ChatGPT: A
      User Study and Design Recommendations. In Extended Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
      Systems. 1–7.
[218] Himanshu Zade, Margaret Drouhard, Bonnie Chinh, Lu Gan, and Cecilia Aragon. 2018. Conceptualizing Disagreement
      in Qualitative Coding. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Montreal
      QC, Canada) (CHI ’18). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1145/
      3173574.3173733
[219] Andres Felipe Zambrano, Xiner Liu, Amanda Barany, Ryan S Baker, Juhan Kim, and Nidhi Nasiar. 2023. From ncoder
      to chatgpt: From automated coding to refining human coding. In International conference on quantitative ethnography.
      Springer, 470–485.
[220] Yuki Zenimoto, Ryo Hasegawa, Takehito Utsuro, Masaharu Yoshioka, and Noriko Kando. 2024. Coding Open-Ended
      Responses using Pseudo Response Generation by Large Language Models. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the
      North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 4:
      Student Research Workshop). 242–254.
[221] Lishan Zhang, Han Wu, Xiaoshan Huang, Tengfei Duan, and Hanxiang Du. 2024. Automatic deductive coding in
      discourse analysis: an application of large language models in learning analytics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.01240
      (2024).
[222] Renwen Zhang, Han Li, Han Meng, Jinyuan Zhan, Hongyuan Gan, and Yi-Chieh Lee. 2025. The dark side of ai
      companionship: A taxonomy of harmful algorithmic behaviors in human-ai relationships. In Proceedings of the 2025
      CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–17.
[223] Caleb Ziems, William Held, Omar Shaikh, Jiaao Chen, Zhehao Zhang, and Diyi Yang. 2024. Can Large Language
      Models Transform Computational Social Science? Computational Linguistics (03 2024), 1–55. https://doi.org/10.1162/
      coli_a_00502
111:48                                                                                                  et al.


A    Full Results of LLM Deductive Coding
Tables 5 and 6 present the full results of the LLM deductive coding (Section 4.2.2). Table 5 shows
how varying components of the codebook affected the agreement between LLMs and human
coders. Building on these results, Table 6 explores the extent to which additional components not
covered by the codebook influenced coding agreement, with each value representing the change in
agreement compared to our baseline condition (highlighted in red in Table 5).

Table 5. Cohen’s 𝜅 between LLM and human codes for each attribution across different prompt configurations,
with the total row showing aggregated agreement across all attributions. Prompts are structured in two main
settings: All-code comp. (providing components for all codes) and Target-code comp. (providing components
only for the target attribution, with others coded as Stigmatizing (others)). These components are cumulative
from left to right, with each column adding to the previous one: name (code name only), +vig (vignette),
+rule (coding rules), +keyword (keywords), and +exp (example). The red column contains the same codebook
components as the human-written codebook, with only format differences, and bold values show the highest
human-LLM agreement for each attribution. Codebook components were systematically varied to assess
their individual contributions to human-LLM agreement. See Section 4.2.2 for analysis and interpretation.

                                   All-code comp.                            Target-code comp.
                  name     +vig       +rule   +keyword     +exp   name    +vig    +rule   +keyword     +exp
Responsibility    0.68     0.67       0.63          0.64   0.69   0.61     0.63    0.62      0.63      0.64
Anger              0.57    0.48        0.6          0.62   0.65   0.3      0.31    0.51      0.52      0.54
Pity              -0.04    -0.03      0.42          0.45   0.46   0.13     0.12    0.44      0.48      0.5
Fear               0.69    0.66       0.63          0.67   0.71   0.58     0.61    0.68      0.69      0.69
Helping           0.15     0.22       0.68          0.69   0.69   -0.03    0.01    0.58      0.62      0.64
Coercive
                  0.58     0.53       0.49          0.51   0.54   0.26     0.24    0.35      0.38      0.35
Segregation
Social Distance   0.59     0.67       0.73          0.74   0.76   0.25     0.34    0.59      0.54      0.61
Total             0.37     0.39       0.64          0.67   0.69   0.28     0.3     0.58      0.59       0.6



B   Prompt Templates
Figure 6 demonstrates an example of our prompt template. This specific example shows the all-code
condition, where we include all eight codes with their complete codebook components. In practice,
we modify this template by varying the components included for each code, as discussed in Section
4.2.2.

C    Autonomous LLM Inductive Coding Results
Table 7 presents the codebook from autonomous LLM inductive coding (Section 4.3).
Exploring the Human-LLM Synergy in Advancing Theory-driven Qualitative Analysis                                   111:49


Table 6. Changes in Cohen’s 𝜅 when comparing prompts with additional components outside the codebook
to prompts with exactly the same components as the human-written codebook. The notations used include
CoT /NoCoT for chain-of-thought presence/absence, S/NS/O for Stigmatizing/Non-stigmatizing/Stigmatizing
(others), and S_NS_O indicates presenting three examples in the prompt with Stigmatizing first, followed by
Non-stigmatizing and Stigmatizing (others). The other notations similarly indicate other possible permutations.
Purple cells show where adding components improved agreement compared to using exact codebook
components, while green cells show where additions decreased agreement, with darker shades indicating
larger differences. These comparisons assess whether components beyond the standard codebook affect
human-LLM agreement. See Section 4.2.2 for analysis and interpretation.

                 + CoT                                     + CoT & + More Examples
                           S_NS_O           S_O_NS          NS_S_O          NS_O_S          O_S_NS          O_NS_S
                         CoT     NoCoT    CoT     NoCoT   CoT     NoCoT   CoT     NoCoT   CoT     NoCoT   CoT     NoCoT
Responsibility   0.03    0.06      0.03   0.04     0.04   -0.02   -0.02   -0.03     0     0.02     0.02   -0.01    0.02
Anger            0.03    0.11      0.09    0.13    0.1    0.08     0.08   0.08    0.09     0.1      0.1    0.07    0.08
Pity             0.05    0.01     -0.02   -0.01   -0.07    0      -0.08   0.03    -0.06   -0.05    -0.1   -0.01   -0.08
Fear             0.02    0.02      0.01    0.02   0.03    0.02     0.03   0.02    0.01    0.02     0.01    0.02    0.02
Helping          0.02    -0.12    -0.09   -0.18   -0.12   -0.15   -0.13   -0.14   -0.09   -0.15   -0.09   -0.16   -0.09
Coercive
                 -0.04   0.05      0.04   0.06     0.08   0.02      0      0        0     0.03     0.02   0.01     0.05
Segregation
Social
                 0.03    0.07      0.06   0.03     0.06   0.03     0.05   0.04     0.05   0.02     0.07   0.07       0
Distance
Total            0.02    0.03      0.02   0.01     0.02    0      -0.01    0        0      0       0.01    0         0


Table 7. Results of the autonomous LLM inductive coding for mental-illness stigma. Themes and codes
were generated through autonomous LLM coding of 181 messages identified as potential new codes from
human-LLM disagreements. The coding process and implementation are detailed in Section 4.3.

 Themes                         Descriptions & Codes
 Theme 1: Health     Topics related to managing health, whether through professional intervention,
 Management          self-care, or community support.
                     Code 1.1: Hospitalization Debate
                     Code 1.2: Home Treatment Preference
                     Code 1.3: Professional Assessment Advocacy
                     Code 1.4: Anger Management
 Theme 2: Support Topics focus on the various forms of support available or needed for individuals,
 Systems             including workplace, community, and emotional support.
                     Code 2.1: Community Support Importance
                     Code 2.2: Workplace Support
                     Code 2.3: Sympathy and Concern
 Theme 3: Mental Topics that specifically relate to mental health issues, including management,
 Health Focus        misconceptions, and the importance of professional assessments.
                     Code 3.1: Mental State Misinterpretation
                     Code 3.2: Anger Management
                     Code 3.3: Professional Assessment Advocacy
 Theme 4: Social Ac- Topics that deal with the acceptance and integration of individuals into various
 ceptance and Inte- social settings, including housing and the workplace.
 gration             Code 4.1: Tenant Acceptance
                     Code 4.2: Workplace Support
111:50                                                                                            et al.


 Themes                 Descriptions & Codes
 Theme 5: Emotional   Topics that touch on the emotional and psychological aspects of well-being, in-
 and Psychological    cluding the management of emotions and the importance of empathy.
 Well-being           Code 5.1: Sympathy and Concern
                      Code 5.2: Anger Management
                      Code 5.3: Mental State Misinterpretation
 Theme 6: Advocacy Topics that involve discussions, debates, or advocacy for certain approaches or
 and Debate           understandings related to health and social integration.
                      Code 6.1: Hospitalization Debate
                      Code 6.2: Professional Assessment Advocacy
 Theme 7: Safety and Topics that are centered around concerns for safety, whether during travel or in
 Concerns             the context of mental health.
                      Code 7.1: Traveling Concerns
                      Code 7.2: Mental State Misinterpretation
 Theme 8: Prefer- Topics that highlight the preference for where and how care and treatment should
 ence and Choice in be received.
 Care                 Code 8.1: Hospitalization Debate
                      Code 8.2: Home Treatment Preference
 Theme 9: Commu- Topics emphasizing the importance of community and social support in various
 nity and Social Sup- aspects of life and well-being.
 port                 Code 9.1: Community Support Importance
                      Code 9.2: Workplace Support
 Theme 10: Conflict Topics related to managing conflicts, whether internal (such as anger) or external
 and Management       (such as tenant acceptance).
                      Code 10.1: Anger Management
                      Code 10.2: Tenant Acceptance
 Theme 11: Mobility Topics that deal with concerns related to mobility, including traveling concerns
 and Accessibility    and the broader implications for individuals needing support.
                      Code 11.1: Traveling Concerns
Exploring the Human-LLM Synergy in Advancing Theory-driven Qualitative Analysis                                                 111:51


 [Role Assignment]      Task                                                                        Role
 You w ill be given a question and the cor responding par ticipant?s opinion. Your role is a com petent
 annot ator for m ent al- illness stigm a. T he question and opinion is based on a vignette?s plot.
 Answer the following question based on the constraints given to you:

 [M ultiple-choice Q uestion]
 Which of the following describes ?[Participant?s O pinion]??
 A. Stigmatizing (responsibility).
 ...
 H . N on-stigmatizing.

 [Code Definition & Keywords]                                                                            Code Definition
 1. R esponsibilit y: A com m on stigm atizing thought is that people have control over and are responsible for
 their m ent al illness and related sym ptom s.                         Keywords
 K eywords: responsible, responsibilit y, weakness, stem from , blam e, etc.
 ...
 8. N on-stigmatizing: T he text explicitly conveys non-stigmatizing content, displaying positive attitudes such as
 sympathy, assistance, friendliness, etc.

 [Examples]                                                                              Complete Example of O ne Code
 [ par ticipant?s opinion] I t could be about how A very is view ing things. I nstead of just focusing on them selves,
 they could think about others?feelings. N ot weakness, just needs a different point of view.
 label: A
 reason: T he par ticipant?s opinion suggests that people w ith m ent al illness need to change the way they view
 things and should think about others?feelings. T his thought im plies that ...
 ...
 [participant?s opinion] Yes, and a friend needs to be there for him. To know that friends can help, just being there.
 label: H

 [Annotation R ules]                                        Annotation R ules on Stigmatizing and N on-stigmatizing
 1. I f a m essage m entions both stigm atizing and non- stigm atizing st atem ents, annot ate it as stigm atizing.
 2. W hen discussing ?responsibilit y?, com m on stigm atizing thoughts are:
     i. People have control over and are responsible for their m ent al illness and related sym ptom s.
     ...                                                         Annotation R ules on Specific Attribution
     v. O ther st atem ents suggest responsibilit y.
     I f a m essage cont ains the stigm atizing thought m entioned in i. - v., choose A .
 ...
 9. If it doesn?t have any stigmatizing thought, choose H .

 [O utput Format]
 Please output your choice in the format of:
 label: [A/B/C/D/E/F/G/H ]
 reason: explain your reason for coding.

 [Q uestion]
 Do you believe Avery?s current situation is primarily a result of their actions? Is their mental condition an indication of
 personal weakness? Please share your thoughts.

 [Participant?s O pinion]
 I believe the outcome is not a result of their actions, but rather a manifestation of their depression. T he depression they
 experience may lead to others not being fond of them.


Fig. 6. An example prompt template for LLM deductive coding, illustrating the all-code condition where each
code’s components align exactly with the human-written codebook.
