                                          Setting the AI Agenda – Evidence from Sweden
                                                       in the ChatGPT Era
                                              Bastiaan Bruinsma∗1 , Annika Fredén2 , Kajsa Hansson2 , Moa




arXiv:2409.16946v1 [cs.AI] 25 Sep 2024
                                                Johansson1 , Pasko Kisić-Merino3 , and Denitsa Saynova1
                                                               1
                                                                   Chalmers University of Technology
                                                                          2
                                                                            Lund University
                                                                        3
                                                                          Karlstad University

                                                                          September 26, 2024


                                                                                  Abstract
                                                    This paper examines the development of the Artificial Intelligence (AI)
                                                meta-debate in Sweden before and after the release of ChatGPT. From the
                                                perspective of agenda-setting theory, we propose that it is an elite outside
                                                of party politics that is leading the debate – i.e. that the politicians
                                                are relatively silent when it comes to this rapid development. We also
                                                suggest that the debate has become more substantive and risk-oriented
                                                in recent years. To investigate this claim, we draw on an original dataset
                                                of elite-level documents from the early 2010s to the present, using op-eds
                                                published in a number of leading Swedish newspapers. By conducting a
                                                qualitative content analysis of these materials, our preliminary findings
                                                lend support to the expectation that an academic, rather than a political
                                                elite is steering the debate.

                                         Keywords — AI debate, agenda setting, AI risk, qualitative content analysis, Sweden


                                         1      Introduction
                                         Since the release of ChatGPT in November 2022, concerns about the potential promises
                                         and pitfalls of artificial intelligence (AI) have raised considerable attention. On the one
                                         hand, AI is seen as a potential solution to several emerging challenges, such as health
                                         crises, food security, and climate change. On the other hand, the debate surrounding
                                         the development of AI seems to revolve mainly around the risks associated with it. In
                                         March 2023, the Future of Life Institute published an open letter, signed by both AI
                                         researchers and industry CEOs, calling for a six-month “pause” on the development of
                                             ∗ Corresponding author. All authors contributed equally to the paper




                                                                                      1
large language models1 . Since then, much media attention has focused on long-term
risks and the fears of AI leading to human extinction, with journalists and authors
such as Ezra Klein2 and Yuval Noah Harari3 claiming that a critical mass of AI experts
believe that AI may pose existential risks to the future. One of the most influential of
these is Eliezer Yudkowsky, who has argued for shutting down AI development4 .
    However, this focus on long-term risk has been strongly criticised by other AI
researchers, such as Timnit Gebru [1]. As one of the authors of a statement published
by the DAIR Institute5 in response to the “pause letter”, Gerbu and her co-authors
called instead for a focus on concrete short-term risks. Instead of the existential focus
of the long-term risks, these risks concern the immediate consequences of AI, such as
that on job displacement and the spread of political misinformation and disinformation
[2, 3], as well as concerns about many aspects of the (un)fairness and bias inherent
to AI systems [4, 5, 6, 7] (see also Weidinger et al. [8] for a discussion of the risks of
large language models specifically). This perspective is also promoted by influential
journals such as Nature [9]. In response to these discussions and debates on AI risk,
the European Commission has moved swiftly to introduce legislative measures aimed
at regulating the use of AI and assessing the associated risks [10]6 .
    Despite being high on the agenda, there are relatively few articles that consider
AI from the perspective of the meta-discussion (for an exception see Nguyen [11]).
Rather, research on AI tends to take a normative stance, focusing on “responsible” AI
(see, for example Dignum [12] and Hedlund and Persson [13]), issues of transparency
[14] or the more technical aspects of AI performance [15, 16, 17]. Instead of this, we
want to take a bird’s eye view of the AI debate by examining developments in a highly
digitised member of the European Union: Sweden.
    Previous research suggests that national media are often the most important source
of public agenda setting, at least in countries such as the UK and Canada [18, 19].
Langer and Gruber [18] suggests that there is a reciprocal relationship between elite
politics and the agenda-setting media, so that politics and editorial gate-keeping are
intertwined. In this particular case, a tentative hypothesis is that the academic elite
is more active in constituting the debate because because it takes a certain level of
confidence and knowledge of an issue to pass through the eye of the editorial needle.
If an academic elite dominates the AI issue, this would represent a shift in a party-
oriented system such as Sweden, where politicians have traditionally played a major
role in shaping people’s opinions [20].
    The material in our study comes from argumentative texts (opinion pieces) by elite
representatives published in leading Swedish newspapers. As the texts consist mainly
of arguments with important information between the lines, we conduct a qualitative
content analysis. This is carried out by three of the authors, each of whom is a native
speaker with a degree in either social sciences or computer science. During the coding
process, we focus on categorising the core content of the texts and classifying whether
an article emphasises short-term or long-term risk, or does not mention risk at all. For
our purposes here, we define short-term as authors writing about concrete risks that
could occur in the near future related to the implementation of AI, whereas long-term
risks are those that refer to hypothetical or existential risks instead.
  1 https://futureoflife.org/open-letter/pause-giant-ai-experiments/
  2 The New York Times, 12-03-2023
  3 The New York Times, 24-03-2023
  4 The Times, 29-03-2023
  5 https://www.dair-institute.org/blog/letter-statement-March2023/
  6 See also: https://artificialintelligenceact.eu/




                                            2
     With our approach, we contribute to the meta-debate on the basis of empirical
evidence, a combination that is largely lacking in current social science studies (where
Acemoğlu and Johnson [2], Dandurand et al. [19] are exceptions). Our analysis sup-
ports the claim that the debate is being led by an academic rather than a political
elite. We also see a trend towards a greater emphasis on short-term risks from 2022
onwards. We discuss the implications of this and relate the debate in Sweden to the
international debate on agenda-setting in the ChatGPT era.


2     Agenda-Setting through Institutions
A starting point for our study is that what is said in the leading newspapers remains
an important source of opinion formation for citizens. A seminal paper by McCombs
and Shaw [21] found that the news media played an important role in telling citizens
what to think about, in effect setting the agenda. On the other hand, the media’s
influence, from their perspective, was more limited in terms of influencing what line of
argument or thought citizens should have. Rather, it acts as a headlamp, telling people
what to think about. More recent work has even questioned the agenda-setting role of
traditional media in this way. One argument is that today’s plethora of media channels
and sources makes it difficult to develop common messages or a “national agenda”, as
people tend to self-select into channels that support their previous interests or views.
In the case of the United States, Bennet and Iyengar concluded back in 2008 that
these behaviours can make traditional media agenda-setting minimal.
    More recent evidence from Sweden, the case for our study, shows that the media
continues to play an important role. Shehata and Strömbäck [23] examine the causal
effect of coverage in the traditional news media on perceived importance by the public.
They find that issues that received more coverage in the traditional news media tended
to be perceived as more important by the public over time. In contrast, no such effects
were documented for issues that were low on the media agenda. Djerf-Pierre et al. [24]
address how media salience from different sources (news media and alternative media)
uniquely affects the relative strength or weakness of “sociotropic” beliefs. They argue
that while alternative and social media have become important elements in agenda
setting and issue salience in Sweden their findings point to a continued important role
for traditional news media. Given that coverage in the traditional news media has an
impact on the perceived salience to the general public in Sweden [23], the number of
articles on AI as such is important. This supports the idea of McCombs and Shaw
[21] that the more coverage there is, the more people will pay attention to it.
    The extent to which the national agenda is top-down or bottom-up driven also
depend on the party system. Some research from the US suggests that US state
legislators are very responsive to public opinion from below [25]. In the US case,
the perspective of the people or party supporters is thus important relative to the
party elite. Holmberg [20] contrasts the United States with the European multi-
party tradition with strong party cohesion and concludes that a top-down perspective
on opinion formation is much more relevant and prevalent in the case of European
countries than in the United States. Looking at the case of Sweden, Holmberg finds
that, for example, on the issue of computers and robotics (which developed in the
1980s and 1990s), the Swedish electorate followed the opinions of party representatives
rather than vice versa. This lends some support to the idea that the political elite
influenced the public on highly technical issues during this period, rather than vice
versa. In addition, recent research from the United Kingdom context suggests that


                                           3
the influence of the media should not be underestimated. Langer and Gruber [18] find
that in the UK context, the national media tend to lead a national conversation on an
issue. These authors discuss a reciprocal relationship between the political elite and
the media.
    The study of agenda-setting dynamics in the public sphere has mostly been advo-
cated for the cases of the United States and the United Kingdom, but recent scholar-
ship has turned its attention to other contexts. Examining the South Korean context,
Zhang et al. [26] investigates how social media have affected the prevailing “rules” of
agenda setting and argues for the consideration of a “multi-participant agenda setting”
dynamics. The authors consider agenda setting in relation to the interplay between
bots, news media and the public in the context of presidential elections and the salience
of key issues in the public sphere. In this context agenda setting appears to partially
shift away from the news media over time, following both the “bot agenda” and the
“public agenda”.


3     The AI Issue
Agenda setting scholarship has also begun to explore the dimension of technology and
AI in the context of techno-political “change” in modern societies, although research to
date is limited. For example, Nguyen [11] addresses the context of public debates about
AI and its more sensitive dimensions, such as privacy, and how these technologically
complex issues are communicated to the general public by Anglophone-Western media.
Using a mixed-methods approach to these debates, the author finds that the extent and
focus of media attention is directly related to the actual spread of AI across different
“societal domains” - e.g. politics, finance and healthcare.
    Using topic modelling, Nguyen finds that over time, these associations have be-
come more focused on the techno-social implications of AI in areas such as international
politics, security and finance over time. Indeed, with the caveat that the sample is
overwhelmingly US-based, Nguyen argues that this signals an increasing politicisation
of AI. This link between AI and politics in the context of 2010 − −2022 is further
explored through the identification of four “risk” categories related to cybercrime/cy-
berwar, information disorder (mis- and disinformation), surveillance, and data bias.
Specifically, Nguyen looks at the increase in “explicit” data risk references in the me-
dia (news articles) over time and finds that a total of 47 percent of AI-centric articles
explicitly address risks, implying a shift towards an overall more attentive media cov-
erage. However, by the end of the data collection period (2020 − −2021), mentions of
risk decreased in Nguyen’s sample.
    From a more critical perspective, Dandurand et al. [19] show that the context can
matter for the type of debate and information that news media disseminate. They ex-
amine the news framing of AI in the Canadian context, where they argue that main-
stream media are reluctant to cover controversies in AI development. The authors
claim that at the heart of this multi-stakeholder process of “freezing out” controver-
sies is the goal of promoting Canada’s artificial intelligence ecosystem as a national
imperative, where Canada has a reputation for leading the AI development. They
also point to the weakness of journalists vis-à-vis tech experts on AI, which signals a
weakening of democratic checks and balances.
    In a very recent piece, Xian et al. [27] look specifically at the coverage and char-
acteristics of English-language (mostly US-based) news articles on generative AI such
as ChatGPT. The authors address the ability of these media to shape perceptions


                                           4
of generative AI technologies over time. To address these issues, the authors use a
mixed-methods approach that combines topic modelling, qualitative coding, and sen-
timent analysis. Similar to Nguyen [11], the topic modelling shows that news coverage
depends on “hype” or “spikes” corresponding to major AI breakthroughs and policy
debates around generative AI. The authors find that key topics such as “regulation
and security” correspond precisely to these temporal spikes.
    However, this topical distribution differs between national contexts. For example,
US-based coverage gives more attention to the topic of “business” and “technological
development”, while Indian coverage is significantly more focused on “corporate tech-
nological development”, and UK and Australian coverage focuses on “regulation and
security” and “technology development”. In addition, business-oriented articles tend
to frame generative AI in a more positive or neutral light, while security and regu-
lation articles (which increasingly focus on AI governance) tend to be more neutral
or negative in their framing. Furthermore, the authors find that US-based articles
tend to be more positive overall in their framing of generative AI technologies than
the non-US Anglophone sample, but mostly in the case of specialised and local news
outlets.
    Our work is related to the perspective of Nguyen [11] and Xian et al. [27], with
the difference that we focus explicitly on argumentative debate articles in mainstream
newspapers. In contrast to Nguyen, we cover a period both before and after the release
of ChatGPT and focus on a case that has not been the focus of similar studies so far:
Sweden.


4     The Swedish Case
Sweden is a parliamentary system where political parties have traditionally played an
important role in organising people and people’s opinions (see Holmberg [20]). Since
2022, the government has consisted of a centre-right minority, although the Social
Democrats are still by far the largest party. At the national government level, Sweden’s
current AI focus is on education, democracy and the media. The newly established
Mediemyndigheten, initiated by the government, aims to increase citizens’ knowledge
about AI and disinformation7 . Another stakeholder group in AI is business, which has
received less attention in the public debate.
     As a member of the European Union since 1995, Sweden is one of the countries that
will adopt a new AI law initiated by the EU Commission and passed by the European
Parliament in March 2024. This law focuses on restricting how AI tools can be used in
practice, depending on whether the risk to humans is considered minimal, limited, high
or unacceptable. While the Swedish parliament has been relatively silent on AI issues,
the supranational level of the EU is thus at the forefront of regulation, as is the case in
some other transnational areas such as climate change policy. Influences from the US
and the continent have also spread to academics and elite debaters. The US debate
[2], where AI is being developed as a potential threat to workers and/or as a real-time
replacement for humans in the public sector, has begun to spread to Sweden. Sweden
also has a vocal academic in the AI debate, physics professor Max Tegmark, who is
sometimes recruited as an expert in the national media, and who took the initiative
to the aforementioned “pause letter”. Another leading scholar in the national and
   7 https://www.regeringen.se/pressmeddelanden/2024/03/mediemyndigheten-ges-i-upp

drag-att-genomfora-nationell-satsning-for-starkt-medie--och-informationskunnigh
et-inom-ai-driven-desinformation/


                                            5
international debate is professor of mathematical statistics Olle Häggström, based at
Chalmers University of Technology, who has recently become more sceptical to the
rapid development of AI [28].
    With this in mind, our overarching research question is:
  Q: How has the Swedish debate on AI evolved?
    From our preliminary understanding of the context, we have the following expec-
tations:
H1:    The debate is growing.
H2:    Arguments about risks are increasing
H3:    The risk debate is being led by an academic and industrial elite rather than a
       political one.


5     Method and Data
Given the nature of the materials and the research question, a starting point was
that qualitative analysis using human annotation was likely to be more valid and
efficient than, for example, an LLM approach. While previous work has highlighted
the promise of using LLMs to classify text [15, 16, 17], there are also limitations, such
as lack of consistency in factual queries [29, 30] and susceptibility to being misled
by (invalid) arguments [31]. Most importantly, LLMs tend to have a general lack
of understanding of the underlying concept [32]. Since the underlying concepts and
arguments are crucial for our study, we expected that human judgement should be at
the centre of the evaluation of the textual material [33, 34, 35].8 We carried out a
qualitative content analysis of the debate material, based on a systematic reading of
the texts.
     For our coding exercise, we had the texts read and classified by three academics
who are native Swedish speakers, have a PhD and come from three different disciplines:
economics, computer science and political science.
     For our data collection we used Mediearkivet9 , where we searched for the terms
“artificiell intelligens” or “AI” or “artificial intelligence” in articles placed in either
the debate or opinion section between 01.01.2000 and 25.10.23. This resulted in 318
articles (after removing duplicates and misidentified pieces). Almost all of them are
a single page, although the actual length of the text varies. Note that this results in
a selection of articles that are both about AI and those that only mention AI as a
simple example. For example, the article “Koppla ihop militär och civil forskning”
only mentions artificial intelligence as an example of one type of research (“Areas such
as cyber security, communication, robotics and artificial intelligence are crucial to the
defence of Sweden”10 ). We then looked at all the articles individually and judged
whether they were really “about” AI or just mentioned it in passing. This led to a
significant reduction to 74 articles.
    8 We also briefly experimented with an LLM approach (using the LLM Gemma) for this

study, but found that the risk classification was not reliable.
    9 We have collected the articles via https://app.retriever-info.com/services/archive.

Due to licensing issues, the articles cannot be freely shared. A full list of the articles included
here, including the title of the article, the name(s) of the author(s) and the date of publication,
is available on request.
   10 “Områden som cybersäkerhet, kommunikation, robotik och artificiell intelligens är helt

avgörande för försvaret av Sverige”


                                                6
     All texts were downloaded in their PDF format, cropped to show only the article
in question (author names and affiliations were removed), and converted to .txt format
using pdftools in R. These latter files were then checked and corrected manually (for
example, to deal with strange characters, font size issues, and problems with columns).
Each article was then split into four sections: title, header, body and additional notes.
Of these, only the body is included in the later analysis. Metadata was also collected
for each article, including a unique document ID, publication date, newspaper title,
article title, section topic (if mentioned), additional notes, authors and affiliations.
     For all articles, we also note the authors (of which there were often more than
two) and their affiliations. We then reduce these affiliations to four broad categories:
corporate (related to companies and businesses), NGO (all non-governmental and
non-commercial organisations), political (related to political parties or holding official
positions) and academic (related to universities and research institutes), as well as
a combination of those working for companies and those working in academia. Of
these categories, most were written by those associated with academia (31 articles),
followed by companies (15 articles), politicians (14 articles), NGOs (10 articles) and
the combination of companies and academia (4 articles).
     We divided the texts between the three human coders, who were given the following
instructions:
    1. Give a single sentence summary of what the text is about
    2. Give a label for the text in a single word (or two if its a common expression
       such as European Union)
    3. Indicate the risk on a scale of three categories: a) no risk, b) short-term risk, c)
       long-term risk
    4. Say why the text was coded into that risk category
    To be classified in one of the risk categories, the concept of risk had to be part
of the core argument of the article, not just mentioned in passing. A short-term
risk classification concerned a risk related to a concrete problem or phenomenon here
and now, whereas a long-term risk concerned hypothetical scenarios and/or existential
threats to humanity. Given our materials, it is difficult to establish strict definitions
of short-term vs. long-term risk, along the lines of, for example, the World Economic
Forum’s distinction between 2-year and 10-year risks [3]. Authors of argumentative
texts are rarely as specific in their writing, so we rely on our overall assessment of
the argument. Since we have three different coders involved in reading the texts, the
validity should increase. In our analysis below, we give examples of the current risk
classification.


6      Results
As mentioned in the methodology section, we coded a total of 74 articles. We will
first look at the categories given by the human coders to better understand what the
articles we selected were about. We then turn to the coding of risk, looking at the
evolution of risk focus over time. Finally, we look at the authorship of the articles to
see if certain authors preferred to talk about different types of risk - or not.




                                             7
Table 1: Overview of the labels and label counts as assigned by the coders. The
Group labels are based on the 36 labels given by the coders.
 Group               Count Example Summary
 Ethics              16        There is a risk in believing that AI can assist
                               decision-making in moral dilemmas
 Regulation          10        Criticism of EU AI regulation
 Risk                9         AI is developing too fast, ChatGPT is just a small
                               step from AGI, this is a major existential risk for
                               humanity
 Applications        7         AI could help us prevent and solve crime
 Characteristics     6         This is what AI is and could be in the future
 Economy             6         The author argues that AI will transform the retail
                               sector
 Labour market       5         Young people will find it harder to get their first job
                               as simpler tasks are automated by AI systems
 Development         5         Suggests the creation of a committee to deal with AI
                               issues
 Education           3         The author argues that people need to be better ed-
                               ucated about the benefits and risks of AI
 Research            3         More interdisciplinary AI research is needed
 Sustainability      2         The author argues that we need to invest in sustain-
                               able AI by integrating responsible and transparent
                               AI practices
 Techno-optimism     2         Technological change should be accelerated to ben-
                               efit the economy, fears of mass unemployment are
                               unfounded




                                       8
6.1     Categories
Table 1 shows the labels assigned to each article by the coders, as well as an example
in the form of a one-sentence description of an article of that type. The most common
label is “Ethics”. These articles describe various topics related to the ethical issues
surrounding AI. Sometimes these arguments include “warnings” about the potential
threat that AI can pose to democracy, or the biases that can arise from using AI trained
on poorly curated data, and the lack of transparency associated with this issue. Other
issues discussed include the inherent limitations of an AI ever becoming human, such
as the impossibility of having a moral compass or ever developing conscious awareness.
Although this is related to risk, not all of them mention it, and when they do, it is
mostly related to the idea of short-term risk.
    The second category, Regulation, deals with various calls for the regulation of AI,
such as criticism of the European Union’s proposed Artificial Intelligence Act, calls for
harmonisation of AI regulation between the US and the EU, and the risks posed by the
lack of regulation. This category is related to, but different from, the Development
category in that the latter is more focused on calls to action, focusing on how AI
should be managed and developed in the country. The third most common category -
risk - discusses issues such as the risks of AI being used for autonomous weapons, the
impact of unreliable and biased training data, and concerns about integrity. Of the 9
articles in this category, 6 are categorised as dealing specifically with long-term risks.
These mostly concern the idea that current AI development is too fast and that future
systems could easily lead to Artificial General Intelligence (AGI).
    The fourth and fifth categories relate to descriptions of what what AI is and vari-
ous applications in which it might be used. Here we find examples of how AI can be
used by the police to help solve crimes, or how hospitals can use it to digitise many of
their systems, or how it can help reduce the administrative burden in public institu-
tions. The sixth and seventh categories are related, but while the “economy” category
focuses on the economic sector (most often commerce) in general, the “labour market”
category focuses mostly on the impact of AI adoption on people’s jobs. In the latter
category, while most authors agree that AI will transform the labour market, the dis-
agreement lies in whether this is seen as a positive development (for example, that AI
will create more jobs and opportunities) or whether this development is negative (for
example, in relation to the first jobs young people take).
    As for the other categories, “Education” focuses on the development of skills re-
lated to AI as well as further investment in more flexible education systems to cope
with rapidly changing markets, “Research” includes articles calling for more (interdis-
ciplinary) research, “Sustainability” focuses on different ways to ensure that AI and its
developments will be sustainable in the future, while “Techno-optimism” includes two
articles that mainly push the framework that any technological change is beneficial
and should be supported and accelerated.

6.2     Types of Risk
Figure 1 illustrates the evolution of the assigned risk categories over time, as deter-
mined by the coders. It is noteworthy that from January 2023, which coincides with
the release of ChatGPT, there was a significant increase in the number of articles
published. This increase was most pronounced for short-term risk articles, while long-
term risk articles showed a more modest increase. Overall, the majority of articles did
not contain a core argument about risk. An example of long-term risk comes form an



                                            9
                   70
                   65
                   60
                   55




Cumulative Count
                   50
                   45                                                                                                                                              Long-Term
                   40                                                                                                                                              Near-Term
                   35                                                                                                                                              No Risk
                   30
                                                                                                                                                                   Total
                   25
                   20
                   15
                   10
                    5

                              6        7        7        8        8        9        9        0        0        1        1        2        2        3        3
                         01       01        01      01       01       01       01       02       02       02       02       02       02       02       02
                         -2       -2       -2       -2       -2       -2       -2       -2       -2       -2       -2       -2       -2       -2       -2
                        07    01       07       01       07       01       07       01       07       01       07       01       07       01       07



Figure 1: Cumulative Number of Articles over time classified by the coders in
the three different types of risk. The vertical dashed line indicates the release
of ChatGPT on November 30, 2022


                                           Table 2: Classification of Risk per Affiliation type
                                           Academic                    Industry                       Industry-                       NGO                   Political      Total
                                                                                                      Academic
      Long-Term                            8                           1                              2                               –                     –              11
      Short-Term                           14                          6                              3                               5                     3              31
      No Risk                              9                           9                              1                               4                     9              32

      Total                                31                          15                             4                               10                    14             74


article accusing “leading AI companies [to play] Russian roulette”11 , with the article
making the argument that AI development in general is moving too fast and that tech-
niques such as ChatGPT are only a small step away from Artificial General Intelligence
(AGI) and therefore a major existential risk to humanity. An example of short-term
risk comes from an article a about the current use of AI by law enforcement and how
it is unreliable (for example, when used for facial recognition) due to racial bias in the
training data12 . Finally, an example of no risk comes from an article entitled “AI is
redrawing the labour market and our skills needs13 , which does not identify any risks
at all, but instead argues that Sweden needs to invest in the data-driven economy in
order not to fall behind the AI development of other countries.




                                                                                                 10
Table 3: Classification of Short-Term and Long-Term Risk per Academic disci-
pline
                               Long-Term Short-Term No Risk Total
 Business Administration            –              3                  2             5
 Chemistry                          –              –                  1             1
 Computer Science                   –              13                 2             15
 Data Science                       1              –                  1             2
 Economics                          3              1                  2             6
 Linguistics                        –              1                  –             1
 Mathematics                        4              1                  –             5
 Media Science                      –              1                  –             1
 Neuroscience                       2              –                  –             2
 Philosophy                         3              1                  1             5
 Physics                            1              –                  –             1
 Social Science                     –              8                  1             9


6.3     Authorship
As Table 6.3 shows, most of the articles (31 out of 74) were written by authors associ-
ated with the academic community, such as professors or researchers, followed by those
associated with industry - most often working in the field of data or computer science;
politicians, either speaking on behalf of their party or on behalf of the government; and
representatives of NGOs. In most cases, articles were written by one or more authors
from a single group, with the only exception being collaborations between those work-
ing in industry and those working in academia. Looking at how the different types
of authors wrote about risk, we find that those associated with NGOs and politicians
never wrote about long-term risk. Instead, these two types either talk equally about
short-term risk, or do not mention risk at all, or have a clear preference for the latter,
as is the case with politicians. Thus, during the studied period, politicians tended to
focus their pieces on neutral aspects of AI rather than highlighting risk.
    Given that so many of the long-term risk articles are written by those who belong
to academia, it might be interesting to look at the type of academic discipline they
belong to, as table 6.3 shows. It is interesting to note that while computer science is
the most common category, none of the authors here wrote an article in the long-term
risk category, opting for short-term risk or not mentioning risk at all. This suggests
that, of all the academic disciplines, computer scientists in the Swedish context do not
want to focus on the long-term aspects. Instead, articles on long-term risk were most
often written by someone working in mathematics, economics or philosophy. In fact, all
four articles written by a mathematician was by the same author. This suggests that a
few academics with experience in different academic fields are highlighting existential
risks, while the majority are not. Another finding is that AI is not (yet) ’owned’ by
politicians, but rather by an academic elite.
 11 Göteborgs Posten, 18-02-2023
 12 Sydsvenskan, 31-07-2020
 13 Dagens industri, 15-12-2022




                                           11
7     Conclusions
This study analysed the evolution of the AI debate in a national context, based on
a human reading of the argumentative texts to identify the evolution over time. We
began our study with the expectation that the character of the AI debate has changed
over the past few years, and that this should be a top-down development. As the
dataset contains arguments and is relatively small, we expected that human expert
coding would be essential, as opposed to categorising pure political news material. We
therefore conducted a qualitative content analysis.
    Our results indicate that the emphasis on short-term risks has increased in the
Swedish public debate since the release of ChatGPT. This finding complements previ-
ous analyses of the prevalence of risks in the news media, for example Nguyen [11], as
we show that the focus on short-term risks has increased since 2022. Furthermore, our
analysis supports the expectation that academics rather than politicians will take the
lead in this debate. This signals a weakening of the parties in Sweden relative to other
arenas of society in relation to previous patterns in this context, e.g. Holmberg [20].
Instead, it seems that it is in the supranational EU context that important directions
of development take place.
    Another reflection is that the Swedish AI debate seems to be somewhat more
nuanced than, for example, the debate in Canada, where Dandurand et al. [19] argue
that the media tend to cool down controversies and risks. The conclusions drawn will
also depend on the material used for the study. In the present study, we focused on
argumentative texts rather than general news coverage. Another finding is that the
long term risk perspective was not very present in our sample, compared to what seem
to be the case among AI developers and computer scientists in the US. In the Swedish
context, the overall debate focuses more on short term risks or is neutral, especially if
a politician takes the tone.
    A relevant follow-up to our study would be to analyse the AI debate in other
national EU contexts: neighbouring countries such as Norway and Denmark, or more
contrasting cases such as Spain, in order to be able to generalise our findings to a
greater extent. EU regulation is still in its infancy, and country differences are likely
to continue to play an important role.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Marianne and Marcus Wallenberg Foundation and
the Wallenberg AI, Autonomous Systems and Software Program – Humanity and
Society. Bastiaan Bruinsma is grateful for support from the GATE Project, funded
by the European Union’s Horizon 2020 WIDESPREAD-2018-2020 TEAMING Phase
2 programme under Grant Agreement No. 857155.

Declaration of Interest
One of the authors, Moa Johansson, declares to have co-authored two opinion articles
analysed here - “Skrämsel om AI döljer de verkliga problemen”, published in Göteborgs
Posten on 24-02-2023, and “Alla måste lära sig mer om artificiell intelligens”, published
in Göteborgs Tidningen on 02-04-2019. To avoid potential conflicts of interest, both
articles were coded by one of the other two coders.




                                            12
References
 [1] E. M. Bender, T. Gebru, A. McMillan-Major, S. Shmitchell, On the Dangers of
     Stochastic Parrots: Can Language Models Be Too Big?, in: Proceedings of the
     2021 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, FAccT
     ’21, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, 2021, pp. 610–623.
     doi:10/gh677h.
 [2] D. Acemoğlu, S. Johnson, Power and Progress, Basic Books, London, UK, 2023.
 [3] World Economic Forum, The Global Risks Report 2023 – 18th Edition, Technical
     Report, Cologny/Geneva, Switzerland, 2023.
 [4] N. Mehrabi, F. Morstatter, N. Saxena, K. Lerman, A. Galstyan, A Survey on
     Bias and Fairness in Machine Learning, ACM Computing Surveys 54 (2021) 1–35.
     doi:10/gmnrrg.
 [5] S. Luccioni, C. Akiki, M. Mitchell, Y. Jernite, Stable Bias: Evaluating Societal
     Representations in Diffusion Models, in: A. Oh, T. Naumann, A. Globerson,
     K. Saenko, M. Hardt, S. Levine (Eds.), Advances in Neural Information Pro-
     cessing Systems, volume 36, Curran Associates, 2023, pp. 56338–56351. URL:
     https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/file/b01153e71
     12b347d8ed54f317840d8af-Paper-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.pdf.
 [6] T. Bolukbasi, K.-W. Chang, J. Zou, V. Saligrama, A. Kalai, Man is to Com-
     puter Programmer as Woman is to Homemaker? Debiasing Word Embeddings,
     in: D. D. Lee, U. von Luxburg, R. Garnett, M. Sugiyama, I. Guyon (Eds.),
     Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Neural Information Process-
     ing Systems, NIPS’16, Curran Associates, Red Hook, NY, 2016, pp. 4356–4364.
     doi:10.5555/3157382.3157584.
 [7] J. Buolamwini, T. Gebru, Gender Shades: Intersectional Accuracy Disparities
     in Commercial Gender Classification, in: S. A. Friedler, C. Wilson (Eds.), Pro-
     ceedings of the 1st Conference on Fairness, Accountability and Transparency,
     volume 81 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, PMLR, 2018, pp. 77–91.
     URL: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v81/buolamwini18a.html.
 [8] L. Weidinger, J. Uesato, M. Rauh, C. Griffin, P.-S. Huang, J. Mellor, A. Glaese,
     M. Cheng, B. Balle, A. Kasirzadeh, C. Biles, S. Brown, Z. Kenton, W. Hawkins,
     T. Stepleton, A. Birhane, L. A. Hendricks, L. Rimell, W. Isaac, J. Haas, S. Legas-
     sick, G. Irving, I. Gabriel, Taxonomy of Risks posed by Language Models, in:
     Proceedings of the 2022 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Trans-
     parency, FAccT ’22, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
     2022, pp. 214–229. doi:10/gqfmhf.
 [9] Stop Talking About Tomorrow’s AI Doomsday When AI Poses Risks Today,
     Nature 618 (2023) 885–886. doi:10/gsfn4s, Editorial.
[10] Council of the European Union, Artificial Intelligence Act, 2024. No. Cion doc.:
     8115/21.
[11] D. Nguyen, How News Media Frame Data Risks in their Coverage of Big Data
     and AI, Internet Policy Review 12 (2023) 1–30. doi:10/gtjbdw.
[12] V. Dignum, Responsible Artificial Intelligence: How to Develop and Use AI in a
     Responsible Way, Springer, 2019. doi:10/gsm9mw.
[13] M. Hedlund, E. Persson, Expert responsibility in AI development, AI & Society
     39 (2022) 453–464. doi:10/gqb4jf.
[14] S. Larsson, F. Heintz, Transparency in articificial intelligence, Internet Policy
     Review 2 (2020). doi:10/gg35rc.
[15] M. Heseltine, B. C. von Hohenberg, Large Language Models as a Substitute


                                          13
     for Human Experts in Annotating Political Text, Research & Politics 11 (2024)
     20531680241236239. doi:10/gtkhqr.
[16] R. Zhang, Y. Li, Y. Ma, M. Zhou, L. Zou, LLMaAA: Making Large Language
     Models as Active Annotators, in: H. Bouamor, J. Pino, K. Bali (Eds.), Findings
     of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023, Association for
     Computational Linguistics, Singapore, 2023, pp. 13088–13103. doi:10/gtnrxr.
[17] F. Gilardi, M. Alizadeh, M. Kubli, ChatGPT outperforms crowd workers for text-
     annotation tasks, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 120 (2023)
     e2305016120. doi:10/gsqx5m.
[18] A. I. Langer, J. B. Gruber, Political Agenda Setting in the Hybrid Media System:
     Why Legacy Media Still Matter a Great Deal, The International Journal of
     Press/Politics 26 (2021) 313–340. doi:10/gg2n8p.
[19] G. Dandurand, F. McKelvey, J. Roberge, Freezing Out: Legacy Media’s Shaping
     of AI as a Cold Controversy, Big Data & Society 2 (2023). doi:10/gtnrr3.
[20] S. Holmberg, Dynamic Opinion Representation, Scandinavian Political Studies
     20 (1997) 265–283. doi:10/btw7cd.
[21] M. E. McCombs, D. L. Shaw, The Agenda-Setting Function of Mass Media,
     Public Opinion Quarterly 36 (1972) 176–187. doi:10/dnd7p4.
[22] W. L. Bennett, S. Iyengar, A New Era of Minimal Effects? The Changing
     Foundations of Political Communication, Journal of Communication 58 (2008)
     707–731. doi:10/dxdvrv.
[23] A. Shehata, J. Strömbäck, Not (Yet) a New Era of Minimal Effects: A Study
     of Agenda Setting at the Aggregate and Individual Levels, The International
     Journal of Press/Politics 18 (2013) 234–255. doi:10/f2z2jt.
[24] M. Djerf-Pierre, A. Shehata, B. Johansson, Media Salience Shifts and the Public’s
     Perceptions About Reality: How Fluctuations in News Media Attention Influence
     the Strength of Citizens’ Sociotropic Beliefs, Mass Communication and Society
     (2024) 1–26. doi:10/gtgbvm.
[25] P. Barberá, A. Casas, J. Nagler, P. J. Egan, R. Bonneau, J. T. Jost, J. A. Tucker,
     Who Leads? Who Follows? Measuring Issue Attention and Agenda Setting by
     Legislators and the Mass Public Using Social Media Data, American Political
     Science Review 113 (2019) 883–901. doi:10/gf9r33.
[26] M. Zhang, Z. Chen, X. Liu, J. Liu, Theory and Practice of Agenda Setting:
     Understanding Media, bot, and public agendas in the South Korean presidential
     election, Asian Journal of Communication 34 (2024) 24–56. doi:10/gs9n4b.
[27] L. Xian, L. Li, Y. Xu, B. Z. Zhang, L. Hemphill, Landscape of Generative AI in
     Global News: Topics, Sentiments, and Spatiotemporal Analysis, arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2401.08899 (2024).
[28] O. Häggström, Tänkande maskiner: Den artificiella intelligensens genombrott,
     Fri Tanke, Stockholm, 2023.
[29] Y. Elazar, N. Kassner, S. Ravfogel, A. Ravichander, E. Hovy, H. Schütze, Y. Gold-
     berg, Measuring and Improving Consistency in Pretrained Language Models,
     Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics 9 (2021) 1012–
     1031. doi:10/gpbd5z.
[30] L. Hagström, D. Saynova, T. Norlund, M. Johansson, R. Johansson, The Effect
     of Scaling, Retrieval Augmentation and Form on the Factual Consistency of Lan-
     guage Models, in: H. Bouamor, J. Pino, K. Bali (Eds.), Proceedings of the 2023
     Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, Association
     for Computational Linguistics, Singapore, 2023, pp. 5457–5476. doi:10/gtn9qc.
[31] B. Wang, X. Yue, H. Sun, Can ChatGPT Defend its Belief in Truth? Evaluating


                                          14
     Llm Reasoning Via Debate, in: H. Bouamor, J. Pino, K. Bali (Eds.), Findings
     of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023, Association for
     Computational Linguistics, Singapore, 2023, pp. 11865–11881. doi:10/gtn9qg.
[32] P. West, X. Lu, N. Dziri, F. Brahman, L. Li, J. D. Hwang, L. Jiang, J. Fisher,
     A. Ravichander, K. Chandu, B. Newman, P. W. Koh, A. Ettinger, Y. Choi, The
     Generative AI Paradox: “What It Can Create, It May Not Understand”, in: The
     Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024, pp. 1–29.
[33] E. Rønningstad, E. Velldal, L. Øvrelid, A GPT among Annotators: LLM-based
     Entity-Level Sentiment Annotation, in: S. Henning, M. Stede (Eds.), Proceed-
     ings of The 18th Linguistic Annotation Workshop (LAW-XVIII), Association for
     Computational Linguistics, St. Julians, Malta, 2024, pp. 133–139.
[34] P. Törnberg, Best Practices for Text Annotation with Large Language Models,
     2024. doi:10/gtn9qf.
[35] H. Kim, K. Mitra, R. L. Chen, S. Rahman, D. Zhang, MEGAnno+: A Human-
     LLM Collaborative Annotation System, 2024. doi:10/gtn9qd.




                                        15
