                                         Decoding Complexity: Exploring Human-AI Concordance in Qualitative
                                         Coding

                                         ELISABETH KIRSTEN, Max Planck Institute for Security and Privacy, Germany
                                         ANNALINA BUCKMANN, Ruhr University Bochum, Germany
                                         ABRAHAM MHAIDLI, Max Planck Institute for Security and Privacy, Germany
                                         STEFFEN BECKER, Ruhr University Bochum, Germany and Max Planck Institute for Security and Privacy, Ger-




arXiv:2403.06607v1 [cs.HC] 11 Mar 2024
                                         many

                                         Qualitative data analysis provides insight into the underlying perceptions and experiences within unstructured data. However, the
                                         time-consuming nature of the coding process, especially for larger datasets, calls for innovative approaches, such as the integration
                                         of Large Language Models (LLMs). This short paper presents initial ﬁndings from a study investigating the integration of LLMs for
                                         coding tasks of varying complexity in a real-world dataset. Our results highlight the challenges inherent in coding with extensive
                                         codebooks and contexts, both for human coders and LLMs, and suggest that the integration of LLMs into the coding process requires
                                         a task-by-task evaluation. We examine factors inﬂuencing the complexity of coding tasks and initiate a discussion on the usefulness
                                         and limitations of incorporating LLMs in qualitative research.

                                         CCS Concepts: • Human-centered computing → HCI design and evaluation methods; • Computing methodologies → Nat-
                                         ural language processing.

                                         Additional Key Words and Phrases: Large Languge Models, Qualitative Data Analysis, Generative Pre-trained Transformer


                                         1 INTRODUCTION
                                         Qualitative Data Analysis (QDA) is an approach used in Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) research to analyze un-
                                         structured data, such as interview data or responses to open-ended survey questions. A fundamental step in QDA is
                                         coding, the systematic process of identifying, annotating, and categorizing data segments based on recurring themes
                                         and patterns, and assigning according categories or “codes” [2–4, 7, 11]. Coding data can be a time-consuming pro-
                                         cess, particularly when analyzing large volumes of data (e. g., tens of thousands of open-ended survey responses).
                                         The emergence of Generative Artiﬁcial Intelligence, and in particular Large Language Models (LLMs) (e. g., GPT-4 [1],
                                         Gemini [20], or Llama 2 [22]) could signiﬁcantly speed up the coding process, yet their value and validity needs to
                                         be evaluated. LLMs have demonstrated remarkable performance in annotation tasks in zero-shot or few-shot learning
                                         scenarios where no or little labeled data is given [8, 21, 25]. As these models become integral to HCI research, it is im-
                                         perative to critically evaluate their potential beneﬁts and risks, as well as methodological challenges associated with
                                         the integration of LLMs. In this workshop submission, we present the preliminary results of a study scrutinizing how
                                         LLMs perform at applying tags for QDA in coding tasks of diﬀerent complexity. Speciﬁcally, we explore LLM-assisted
                                         QDA of a real-world dataset to understand how LLMs perform, how they compare to human coders, and how their
                                         performance is aﬀected by the type of coding (e. g., semantic vs. latent themes [4]). First, we develop a strategy for
                                         prompting LLMs to apply tags for QDA. We then implement this strategy with GPT-3.5 [5] and GPT-4 [1] on inter-
                                         view data and compare the models’ performance with human coding in three tasks that require diﬀerent levels of
                                         interpretation.
                                         Authors’ addresses: Elisabeth Kirsten, elisabeth.kirsten@mpi-sp.org, Max Planck Institute for Security and Privacy, Bochum, Germany;
                                         Annalina Buckmann, Ruhr University Bochum, Bochum, Germany; Abraham Mhaidli, Max Planck Institute for Security and Privacy, Bochum, Germany;
                                         Steﬀen Becker, Ruhr University Bochum, Bochum, Germany and Max Planck Institute for Security and Privacy, Bochum, Germany.
                                                                                                                                                                                   1
2                                                                                                                                         Kirsten et al.


2 RESEARCH METHOD
To evaluate the performance of LLMs in QDA, we provide the model with segments of qualitative data from interview
transcripts1 , a human-generated codebook, and the instruction to assign zero, one, or more tags to each data segment
using codes from the codebook. We then calculate the Inter-Rater Reliability (IRR) to evaluate the agreement of the
resulting coded datasets between LLMs and human coders. We analyze three distinct themes in the data, each of which
presents unique challenges and considerations for coding.

    Coding Tasks. The models and two human coders annotate the dataset using the same human-generated codebook
per task2 . We hypothesize that the diﬃculty of assigning tags to interview segments is inﬂuenced by several factors,
such as the length of the segments, the codebook and its length, and the background knowledge and judgment required
to assign appropriate categories. In this context, Braun and Clarke [4] classify possible themes as semantic/latent or
a combination of both. Semantic themes can be identiﬁed from the surface meanings of the data by simply looking at
what a participant has said. Latent themes go beyond the surface meaning of the data and require interpretation of
the underlying ideas and assumptions. To analyze how the similarity of results between human coders and LLMs is
aﬀected by coding for semantic versus latent themes, we perform coding for three diﬀerent coding tasks:
     (1) Task A (Internet-connected devices): This coding task involves identifying the Internet-connected devices that
          participants use. We expect that the assignment of semantic codes for Internet-connected devices is straight-
          forward for both humans and LLMs, and requires only the identiﬁcation of the entities as communicated by
          the interviewees. (average segment length: 118 words; codebook length: 18 codes)
     (2) Task B (Apps, programs, services, and use cases): This coding task focuses on apps, programs, and services partic-
          ipants use on their Internet-connected devices and for what purpose. This introduces a layer of complexity, as
          participants may articulate their interactions in diﬀerent ways, e. g., by enumerating individual apps, grouping
          applications, or explicitly describing their use cases. This variability introduces a hierarchy in the data that
          demands both semantic and latent coding. (average segment length: 274 words; codebook length: 24 codes)
     (3) Task C (Trusted sources): This coding task explores participants’ practices and sources when seeking guidance
          on digital security and privacy. This task goes beyond capturing the semantic content of the data, as it requires
          examining underlying ideas and assumptions. (average segment length: 469 words; codebook length: 32 codes)

    Experimental Design. For our experiments, we use OpenAI’s GPT-3.5 [5] and GPT-4 [1] models via the API service. To
achieve more consistent and less random completions, we set the temperature parameter to 0. To enable performance
comparisons between humans and LLMs, we implement both coding approaches in an annotation task, where the
models and human coders code all data segments using a human-generated codebook as a common benchmark for
evaluation. We design a prompt for each coding task to instruct the models to perform the coding given an interview
segment and the codebook, following the scheme in Figure 1. We experiment with two diﬀerent models and prompt
engineering techniques, including few-shot learning [5, 16, 24]:
      • GPT-3.5 Turbo vs. GPT-4: We compare the performance of OpenAI’s GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 models. While GPT-4
          oﬀers broader general knowledge via a larger context window and can follow complex instructions, GPT-3.5
          is oﬀered at a lower price, and versions of this model are also accessible via OpenAI’s free AI system ChatGPT.
1 The data for our experiments is drawn from a separate interview study (n=47) focused on users’ perceptions of digital security and privacy. The
interview data is in German, and we conduct all experiments using German data segments and prompts.
2 To facilitate the coding process and adhere to the models’ token length limits, two researchers extracted relevant segments from the interview transcripts
for all three coding tasks.
Exploring Human-AI Concordance in Qualitative Coding                                                                                   3


      • Zero-shot vs. One-shot vs. Few-shot: Providing the model with expected inputs and outputs can increase perfor-
         mance, and teach the model to adopt a speciﬁc style [5]. In the zero-shot setting, we do not include examples
         in the prompt. In the one-shot setting, we provide the model with one exemplary data segment and expected
         output. In the few-shot setting, we provide three examples3 .

   Evaluation of Agreement. For each coding task, we calculate the Inter-Rater Reliability (IRR) between the two human
coders as well as between the ﬁnal, uniﬁed human annotations and both models via Cohen’s Kappa [6, 14]. While the
IRR between human coders is based on the 80% of annotations that were not used to generate the codebook, we compute
the IRR between models and humans based on all annotations.


3 RESULTS: AGREEMENT BETWEEN HUMANS AND LLMS
Table 1 presents the IRR between human coders’ and models’ annotations. For tasks A and B, human coders achieved
almost perfect agreement and for Task C they reached substantial agreement. GPT-4 consistently outperforms its
predecessor in all three tasks. It achieves almost perfect agreement with human annotations on Task A in all settings
– comparable to inter-human agreement. In contrast, with zero or one example, GPT-3.5 only achieves substantial
agreement in Task A, which can be raised to almost perfect agreement when three examples are provided. In Task B,
both models show moderate to substantial agreement. However, in Task C, the agreement for GPT-3.5 is only fair for
the one-shot and few-shot settings, while GPT-4 achieves moderate agreement across all settings. As the complexity
of the coding tasks increases from Task A to Task C, there is both a notable decrease in inter-human agreement and a
widening gap between inter-human and model-human scores.


Table 1. IRR in the form of Cohen’s 𝜅 between the two human coders (top) and between both models and human coders (bottom).
Scores for Cohen’s 𝜅 range from −1 to 1, and can be characterized as indicating no agreement (𝜅 < 0.0), slight agreement (0.0 ≤
𝜅 ≤ 0.2), fair agreement (0.2 < 𝜅 ≤ 0.4), moderate agreement (0.4 < 𝜅 ≤ 0.6), substantial agreement (0.6 < 𝜅 ≤ 0.8), or almost
perfect agreement (0.8 < 𝜅 ≤ 1) [12, 14].


                   Task A (Internet-connected devices)         Task B (Apps, programs, services)         Task C (Trusted sources)
 inter-human                         0.97                                      0.83                                0.63
                   Zero-Shot     One-Shot       Few-Shot       Zero-Shot     One-Shot     Few-Shot   Zero-Shot   One-Shot   Few-Shot
 gpt-3.5-turbo        0.74          0.78           0.85           0.60          0.58         0.56      0.43        0.36       0.34
 gpt-4                0.97          0.94           0.95           0.75          0.74         0.75      0.56        0.55       0.58



   Providing the model with examples did not signiﬁcantly improve IRR. However, it played a critical role in mitigating
certain challenges, particularly for GPT-3.5, given its inherent limitations, such as restricted input and output sizes. In
particular, few-shot learning helped reduce the number of formatting errors that required manual correction. It also
played a key role in reducing the number of codes introduced by the model that did not exist in the given codebook,
commonly referred to as hallucinations [9]. Notably, GPT-3.5 introduced as many as 47 new, incorrect codes for Task B
– an amount that could be reduced by more than half with the provision of examples. In contrast, GPT-4 generated
only two incorrect codes in the same setting.


3 As examples, we use synthetic interview data generated with GPT-4 and annotated by human coders.
4                                                                                                            Kirsten et al.


4 DISCUSSION
    Inter-human vs. model-human performance. Although inter-human agreement is in one case equivalent to, and gen-
erally higher than model-human agreement, our research highlights the shared challenges faced by human coders and
LLMs when confronted with increasingly complex QDA tasks. Our quantitative ﬁndings underscore the inherent diﬃ-
culty in coding with longer codebooks and contexts, which necessitates capturing nuanced signals and latent themes.
Thus, we advocate for the evaluation of LLMs on a task-speciﬁc basis, recognizing that not all tasks are uniformly
compatible with LLMs. Various factors, including data collection methods (e. g., survey data, interview data) and seg-
mentation techniques, contribute to the complexity of QDA. Our ongoing work delves into these dimensions to gain
a comprehensive understanding of the challenges and nuances associated with using LLMs for qualitative coding.

    Model choice and few-shot learning. GPT-4 outperformed GPT 3.5 on all tasks, indicating an improved ability to
understand and encode qualitative data. While GPT-4 shows higher agreement with human coders, GPT-3.5 oﬀers a
considerably lower cost, with input tokens priced 60 times less in our experiments [17]. This makes GPT-3.5 particularly
suitable for rapid prototyping, e. g., when engineering prompts for QDA. While few-shot learning did not improve the
models’ performance, it could play a crucial role in mitigating hallucinations and formatting errors, especially for less
capable models such as GPT-3.5. However, researchers will need to consider whether to use synthetic examples or to
manually annotate a subset of data to provide examples. This decision may impact performance, calling for a careful
analysis of the choice of examples for few-shot learning.

    Methodological challenges. While IRR provides a quantitative measure of agreement, it falls short of capturing the
depth and subtleties of qualitative analysis [13]. In our future work, we aim to conduct a qualitative assessment of our
results, along with a detailed error analysis. It is critical to recognize that the human benchmark is not infallible, as
human coders are susceptible to subjectivity and potential bias [18, 19]. This raises the normative question of whether
to hold LLMs to the standard of human coding or to explore alternative scales and benchmarks that might better
capture the strengths and limitations of these models.

    Risks and limitations. While LLMs exhibit remarkable performance in processing and generating language [5, 25],
there are inherent limitations in their ability to understand and encode complex contexts, especially in tasks that require
a deeper understanding, potentially leading to oversights and misinterpretations. Moreover, the role and integration of
LLMs in QDA requires a normative discussion. For some, the researcher’s subjectivity is integral to QDA [23], where
they essentially serve as the measurement instrument [15]. In this view, coding involves becoming familiar with the
data, and its meaning is derived through human interpretation. Using LLMs for coding could disrupt this process,
removing human involvement in text interpretation. Thus, aside from determining the suitability of LLMs for speciﬁc
coding tasks, it is crucial to reconsider the fundamental purpose of QDA. In addition, the current lack of transparency
in LLMs makes it diﬃcult to track the reasoning behind the results generated. Small changes in prompt phrasing
can result in completely diﬀerent outputs [10]. Memory issues and limited context windows raise concerns about the
consistency and reproducibility of model outputs, as the model does not retain information about its coding decisions
between segments. In addition, the use of LLMs involves the processing of signiﬁcant amounts of data, raising questions
about the conﬁdentiality and protection of sensitive information of participants, especially when using ChatGPT as
a non-API consumer application. As LLMs become more integrated into qualitative research, ethical considerations
regarding these challenges and their potential impact on research ﬁndings become paramount. Continued attention
Exploring Human-AI Concordance in Qualitative Coding                                                                                               5


to ethical guidelines and responsible use of LLMs is essential to maintaining the integrity and reliability of qualitative
research.




REFERENCES
 [1] Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam
     Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. 2023. GPT-4 Technical Report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774 (2023).
 [2] Anne Adams, Peter Lunt, and Paul Cairns. 2008. A qualitative approach to HCI research. (2008).
 [3] Tiﬀany Bergin. 2018. An Introduction to Data Analysis: Quantitative, Qualitative and Mixed Methods. An Introduction to Data Analysis (2018),
     1–296.
 [4] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. 2006. Using Thematic Analysis in Psychology. Qualitative research in psychology 3, 2 (2006), 77–101.
 [5] Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry,
     Amanda Askell, et al. 2020. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems 33 (2020), 1877–1901.
 [6] Jacob Cohen. 1960. A Coeﬃcient of Agreement for Nominal Scales. Educational and psychological measurement 20, 1 (1960), 37–46.
 [7] Uwe Flick. 2022. An Introduction to Qualitative Research. An introduction to qualitative research (2022), 1–100.
 [8] Fabrizio Gilardi, Meysam Alizadeh, and Maël Kubli. 2023. ChatGPT Outperforms Crowd-Workers for Text-Annotation Tasks. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2303.15056 (2023).
 [9] Ziwei Ji, Nayeon Lee, Rita Frieske, Tiezheng Yu, Dan Su, Yan Xu, Etsuko Ishii, Ye Jin Bang, Andrea Madotto, and Pascale Fung. 2023. Survey of
     Hallucination in Natural Language Generation. Comput. Surveys 55, 12 (2023), 1–38.
[10] Erik Jones and Jacob Steinhardt. 2022. Capturing Failures of Large Language Models via Human Cognitive Biases. Advances in Neural Information
     Processing Systems 35 (2022), 11785–11799.
[11] Udo Kuckartz. 2019. Qualitative Text Analysis: A Systematic Approach. Compendium for early career researchers in mathematics education (2019),
     181–197.
[12] J Richard Landis and Gary G Koch. 1977. The Measurement of Observer Agreement for Categorical Data. biometrics (1977), 159–174.
[13] Nora McDonald, Sarita Schoenebeck, and Andrea Forte. 2019. Reliability and Inter-Rater Reliability in Qualitative Research: Norms and Guidelines
     for CSCW and HCI Practice. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. (CSCW) (2019).
[14] Mary L McHugh. 2012. Interrater reliability: the kappa statistic. Biochemia medica 22, 3 (2012), 276–282.
[15] Sharan B Merriam and Elizabeth J Tisdell. 2015. Qualitative Research: A Guide to Design and Implementation. John Wiley & Sons.
[16] OpenAI. 2023. Prompt Engineering Guide. Retrieved 2024-02-02 from https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/prompt-engineering
[17] OpenAI. 2024. Pricing. Retrieved 2024-02-23 from https://openai.com/pricing
[18] Anna-Marie Ortloﬀ, Matthias Fassl, Alexander Ponticello, Florin Martius, Anne Mertens, Katharina Krombholz, and Matthew Smith. 2023. Diﬀerent
     Researchers, Diﬀerent Results? Analyzing the Inﬂuence of Researcher Experience and Data Type During Qualitative Analysis of an Interview and
     Survey Study on Security Advice. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–21.
[19] C.B. Seaman. 1999. Qualitative methods in empirical studies of software engineering. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 25, 4 (1999),
     557–572. https://doi.org/10.1109/32.799955
[20] Gemini Team, Rohan Anil, Sebastian Borgeaud, Yonghui Wu, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jiahui Yu, Radu Soricut, Johan Schalkwyk, Andrew M Dai,
     Anja Hauth, et al. 2023. Gemini: A Family of Highly Capable Multimodal Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11805 (2023).
[21] Petter Törnberg. 2023. ChatGPT-4 Outperforms Experts and Crowd Workers in Annotating Political Twitter Messages with Zero-Shot Learning.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.06588 (2023).
[22] Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava,
     Shruti Bhosale, et al. 2023. Llama 2: Open Foundation and Fine-Tuned Chat Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288 (2023).
[23] Safary Wa-Mbaleka. 2020. The Researcher as an Instrument. In Computer Supported Qualitative Research, António Pedro Costa, Luís Paulo Reis,
     and António Moreira (Eds.). Springer International Publishing, Cham, 33–41.
[24] Jules White, Quchen Fu, Sam Hays, Michael Sandborn, Carlos Olea, Henry Gilbert, Ashraf Elnashar, Jesse Spencer-Smith, and Douglas C Schmidt.
     2023. A Prompt Pattern Catalog to Enhance Prompt Engineering with ChatGPT. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.11382 (2023).
[25] Caleb Ziems, William Held, Omar Shaikh, Jiaao Chen, Zhehao Zhang, and Diyi Yang. 2023. Can Large Language Models Transform Computational
     Social Science? arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.03514 (2023).
6                                                                                                                Kirsten et al.


A PROMPT DESIGN

Persona                                                                                      Study Topic
You are an expert in qualitative research methods and you are conducting a study on users’ privacy perceptions. You
           Data Type                                             Methodology
conducted semi-structured interviews and want to perform thematic analysis. The guiding research question is
Research Question
“What technical devices, which are connected to the Internet, do our participants use?”.
            Codes
Identify all Internet-connected devices used by the interviewee in the given interview transcript and assign them one
of the following themes:
Codebook
[Laptop, Desktop PC, Smartphone, Tablet, Smart Watch, Smart TV, Smart Speaker, Internet Radio, Video Game Console,
Home Server, Network-Attached Storage (NAS), Printer, Vacuum Robot, Smart Kitchen Appliances, Smart
Toothbrush, Smart Switches and Light Bulbs, Smart Home Devices, Connected Car]
                           Format
Format the response as a simple list including the themes present in the transcript. If none are found, an empty list []
is returned (Optionally: Examples).


Fig. 1. Prompt template for coding Internet-connected devices with optional examples. We modify the highlighted text sections to
change the coding task.
