                                         Large Language Models for Large-Scale, Rigorous
                                          Qualitative Analysis in Applied Health Services
                                                             Research

                                                Sasha Ronaghi1, 2*, Emma-Louise Aveling3 , Maria Levis4 ,
                                                         Rachel L. Ross5 , Emily Alsentzer1,2 ,
                                                    and Sara Singer, for the iPATH investigators5,6,7*




arXiv:2601.14478v1 [cs.CL] 20 Jan 2026
                                            1
                                              Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, 353 Jane
                                                          Stanford Way, Stanford, CA, 94305, USA.
                                         2
                                           Department of Biomedical Data Science, Stanford School of Medicine,
                                                         300 Pasteur Dr, Stanford, CA, 94305, USA.
                                           3
                                             Department of Health Policy and Management, Harvard T.H. Chan
                                         School of Public Health, 677 Huntington Ave, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.
                                                 4
                                                   Impactivo LLC, 1606 PR-25, San Juan, PR, 00901, USA.
                                         5
                                           Department of Medicine, Stanford School of Medicine, 300 Pasteur Dr,
                                                                  Stanford, CA, 94305, USA.
                                              6
                                                Department of Health Policy, Stanford School of Medicine, 615
                                                          Crothers Way, Stanford, CA, 94305, USA.
                                                   7
                                                     Implementing Scalable, PAtient-centered, Team-based,
                                            Technology-enabled Care for Adults with Type 2 Diabetes (iPATH)
                                                      investigators (see Supplementary Information S1).


                                                *Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): sronaghi@stanford.edu;
                                                                 sara.singer@stanford.edu;
                                                     Contributing authors: eaveling@hsph.harvard.edu;
                                                      maria.levis@impactivo.com; rossrl@stanford.edu;
                                                                  ealsentzer@stanford.edu;


                                                                             Abstract
                                           Large language models (LLMs) show promise for improving the efficiency of
                                           qualitative analysis in large, multi-site health-services research. Yet method-
                                           ological guidance for LLM integration into qualitative analysis and evidence



                                                                                 1
     of their impact on real-world research methods and outcomes remain limited.
     We developed a model- and task-agnostic framework for designing human-LLM
     qualitative analysis methods to support diverse analytic aims. Within a multi-
     site study of diabetes care at Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs),
     we leveraged the framework to implement human-LLM methods for (1) qual-
     itative synthesis of researcher-generated summaries to produce comparative
     feedback reports and (2) deductive coding of 167 interview transcripts to refine a
     practice-transformation intervention. LLM assistance enabled timely feedback to
     practitioners and the incorporation of large-scale qualitative data to inform the-
     ory and practice changes. This work demonstrates how LLMs can be integrated
     into applied health-services research to enhance efficiency while preserving rigor,
     offering guidance for continued innovation with LLMs in qualitative research.

     Keywords: Qualitative Analysis, Large Language Models, Health Services Research,
     Human–AI Collaboration




1 Introduction
Qualitative approaches are critical to health-services research because they identify the
personal and interpersonal experiences, organizational dynamics, and contextual fac-
tors that shape how care is delivered and received [1]. Yet the demands of large-scale,
applied health studies often exceed available time and resources, and findings must be
timely to remain relevant for practitioners [2]. Large Language Models (LLMs) may
enhance analytic efficiency [3, 4], but their use also risks reducing analysis to superfi-
cial, context-blind classifications [5, 6] and compromising methodological transparency
[3, 7, 8].
    Methodological guidance for integrating LLMs into real-world qualitative anal-
ysis workflows remains limited. Prior work on human-AI collaboration emphasizes
maintaining rigor by using AI for specific research tasks and ensuring researchers
retain interpretive control [9, 10]. However, the flexibility of all-purpose chatbot inter-
faces like ChatGPT has encouraged more generalized usage across the entire research
process [7, 11, 12]. Such ubiquity risks undermining methodological transparency, a
cornerstone of rigor in qualitative analysis [13]. Guidance is therefore needed on how
to leverage the generality of LLMs and emerging LLM-based analysis tools [14, 15]
into formalized, task-specific human-LLM qualitative analysis methods, particularly
in applied studies where analytic goals, data sources, and most helpful way to report
findings are highly context-dependent.
    Furthermore, there is a need for greater understanding of how LLM use ultimately
influences real-world research methods and outcomes. Novel LLM-based systems
for qualitative analysis designed by computer scientists illustrate methodological
advancements, but do not focus on integrating LLMs into research studies [14, 15].
Qualitative scholars have compared LLMs to human analysts for qualitative coding
[16–19] and thematic analysis [20–23]. Although they highlight the promise and limi-
tations of LLMs for qualitative analysis, these studies typically prompt LLMs through
commercial chat interfaces, limiting their ability to demonstrate LLM usability on


                                             2
large-scale, confidential datasets. Integrating LLMs into ongoing, real-world research
studies through extensive collaboration between qualitative and computer science
researchers will enable understanding of how LLMs can add value for analyzing large,
heterogeneous datasets typical of applied health research.
    In this paper, we propose a framework for designing task-specific human–LLM
qualitative analysis methods. We demonstrate how this framework provides method-
ological guidance for the integration of efficient and rigorous LLM-assisted qualitative
analysis within a large, applied health-services research study focused on under-
standing and improving diabetes care practices at Federally Qualified Health Centers
(FQHCs) [24].
    The study spans four research teams from California, Ohio, Massachusetts, and
Puerto Rico, involving more than 35 research personnel. Between April and December
2024, researchers conducted a comparative case study across 12 FQHCs, including 167
interviews with clinicians, administrators, patient representatives, and other key stake-
holders, to identify organizational conditions and processes that supported or impeded
effective diabetes care. The team sought to generate findings for scholarly dissemina-
tion, provide actionable feedback to practitioners, and refine a practice transformation
intervention designed to improve diabetes care at FQHCs. After refining the inter-
vention, research teams intend to implement the intervention across eight additional
FQHC sites and evaluate its impact on patient outcomes.
    Through a collaboration of qualitative and computer science researchers, we uti-
lized LLMs in two distinct qualitative analysis tasks after data collection for the
comparative case study across 12 FQHCs. Task 1 involved qualitative synthesis to
generate comparative summary reports for feedback to FQHCs, analyzing high-level
summaries produced by the research teams about key elements of diabetes care
(∼31,200 total words). Task 2 entailed deductive qualitative coding of 167 inter-
view transcripts (∼8,600 total minutes, ∼1,327,000 total words) to refine the planned
intervention.

2 Results
We present a framework for designing task-specific human-LLM qualitative analysis
methods and report results from its application to two analytic tasks: (1) qualitative
synthesis to generate comparative summary reports for feedback to FQHCs, and (2)
deductive qualitative coding to refine the planned study intervention. For each task,
we followed the four steps described below and depicted in Fig. 1.
Step 1: Define Task. We manually completed the task on a small data sample to
clarify goals, finalize output format, document workflow, and set quality expectations.
We also identified which components must be done by qualitative researchers to ensure
their familiarity with the data, necessary for future evaluation and interpretation of
LLM outputs.
Step 2: Design human-LLM method. We divided the task into discrete parts to
surface actions by qualitative researchers difficult to identify by viewing the task holis-
tically, such as applying context-dependent judgment or drawing on prior knowledge.
For each part, we specified its purpose, identified the researcher’s tacit contributions,


                                            3
Fig. 1 The framework we developed and applied for developing task-specific human-LLM qualitative
analysis methods.


and considered whether to use LLMs, allowing us to test different configurations of
human and LLM involvement within each task.
Step 3: Evaluate human-LLM method at small-scale. Two researchers com-
pared outputs generated with and without LLM assistance on a small dataset, and
their assessments informed team discussion. This approach enabled rigorous evaluation
through blending the diverse expertise of the team [25].
    One challenge in evaluating LLMs for qualitative analysis is the absence of a clear
“gold standard,” since replicability is a contested marker of quality in qualitative
research [26]. Common quantitative measures such as inter-rater reliability or over-
lapping thematic coverage [14, 17, 20] fail to capture whether use of an LLM can
achieve the same interpretative depth of insight as qualitative investigators and over-
look that appropriate quality markers are contingent on task and study specifics.
Instead, we evaluated findings against task-specific goals and established criteria of
qualitative rigor such as: grounding in the data, integration of theory and data, align-
ment with the research question, significance and relevance to the field, and usefulness
for practitioners [13].
    These evaluations guided how LLM outputs were integrated and interpreted when
applied to the larger dataset. In both tasks, we considered the human-LLM approach
sufficient for application to the larger dataset when the variation in outputs between
manual and human-LLM analyses resembled the variation we would expect to observe
between two human researchers applying the same methods (e.g., showing similar
interpretive quality, fit with analytic goals, and utility in the overall analytical process).
This benchmark offered a practical way to determine at which steps to incorporate
LLMs.

                                               4
Step 4: Apply and evaluate human-LLM method for entire task. We doc-
umented use of human-LLM output in practice and evaluated its impact on research
goals and efficiency.


2.1 Task 1. Providing Comparative Summary Reports to
    Participating FQHCs: a Qualitative Synthesis Task
Step 1: Define Task. The objective of Task 1 was to transform the qualita-
tive data from the comparative case study into actionable feedback for participating
FQHC sites to use for organizational learning and improvement. Specifically, qual-
itative researchers sought to generate site-level summaries and cross-site syntheses
across 22 care practice domains (e.g. information and communication technology,
staff development, patient-provider relationship; see Supplementary Information S2.1),
aligned with a widely used management framework [27] and the study’s research ques-
tions. Qualitative researchers, in consultation with physicians, first developed site-level
summaries (3–5 bullet points per domain) without LLM assistance to deepen their
familiarity with the data and engage in collaborative reflection about lessons learned.
LLMs were then introduced to support cross-site synthesis of each domain. Participat-
ing sites each received a report with their own site-level summary and the cross-site
synthesis for each domain.

Step 2: Design human-LLM method. Researchers manually produced cross-site
syntheses for each domain first, by grouping site-level summary data into themes, then
by synthesizing findings into an actionable summary. This process informed the stages
in which we incorporated LLMs.
    Qualitative researchers first grouped each site’s summary bullets for a given domain
into themes to facilitate pattern identification across sites, ignoring bullet points
deemed less relevant. To mirror this step, we prompted OpenAI’s ChatGPT-4o model
to produce output organized into themes. We instructed the LLM to sort original bul-
let points from all sites within one domain into categorical themes without altering
the original data points and creating a “miscellaneous” category for remaining content
so all data remained visible to qualitative researchers.
    After organizing site summary data into themes, qualitative researchers developed
the final cross-site summary for each domain, identifying actionable insights, lessons
learned, and creative or good practices. Similarly, we prompted OpenAI’s o1 model to
generate a cross-site synthesis based on every site’s data for the domain. We provided
the LLM with the task goal, four example manually-derived cross-site syntheses to
demonstrate the desired structure and depth—a strategy known as few-shot prompting
[28]—and domain definitions that reflected the management framework and guided
how researchers manually interpreted findings. See Supplementary Information S2.2
for prompts.

Step 3: Evaluate human-LLM method at small-scale. Two qualitative
researchers generated cross-site syntheses for two similar domains: information and
communication technology and technology for clinical care. Each produced one sum-
mary manually and the other with the LLM outputs as reference, ensuring that both


                                            5
approaches were applied to both domains while accounting for individual researcher
differences.
    The quality of the site summaries developed with and without LLM assistance
were comparable in analytic quality and research conclusions, similar to having two
qualitative researchers with different perspectives approach the same dataset and ques-
tion. The AI-assisted approach reduced time by 30% for Researcher 1 and 55% for
Researcher 2 (calculated as the difference in time to complete summaries with and
without LLM support for the two comparable domains). We attribute this discrepancy
to Researcher 1 having greater familiarity with the task and dataset.
    The LLM’s thematically organized output aligned closely with how researchers
grouped the data manually. Researchers retained most LLM-generated themes but
revised them to be more descriptive, use practitioner-oriented language, and high-
light innovation. The miscellaneous category often captured vague or misaligned input
data, which, analogous to what inter-rater reliability would reveal, signaled when site
teams may have misinterpreted domain definitions. Fig. S3 in Supplementary Informa-
tion S2.3 illustrates modifications for the information and communication technology
domain.
    Comparing the LLM syntheses to those developed manually, we determined that
LLMs could not replace researchers’ final interpretation. LLM outputs lacked the
nuance and specificity required to be actionable for FQHC sites, shown in Fig. 2. LLMs
also incorporated all input data into the cross-site summary, regardless of whether the
data produced novel, useful, and non-redundant insights. In contrast, researchers omit-
ted themes they determined to add little value based on their knowledge of relevant
literature and existing practices (example in Fig. S3 in Supplementary Information
S2.3). Additionally, because practices varied at sites, input site summaries did not
always align with domain definitions, especially if researchers emphasized different
facets of more broadly defined domains. While researchers moved misaligned data to
other domains while organizing themes, the LLM included it in the cross-site synthesis
(example in Fig. S3 in Supplementary Information S2.3). These observations high-
lighted the importance of qualitative researchers making final interpretations of the
data to ensure the outputs aligned with the task goal of being actionable and novel
for FQHCs.
    The LLM proved useful for organizing site-level data such that qualitative
researchers had a comprehensive view of the site summary data, increasing researchers’
confidence that no information was missed in their final interpretation of data.
Although LLM-generated summaries were not usable as final output, researchers still
found them helpful for identifying patterns across sites and sometimes providing use-
ful language. Based on these findings, we finalized a human-LLM approach (Fig. 3)
where the LLM thematically organizes site summary data for each domain, which the
researchers refine and synthesize into a final cross-site synthesis.


Step 4: Apply and evaluate human-LLM method for entire task. Using
LLMs to organize data into patterns lightened cognitive load and enabled researchers
to more quickly arrive at a final draft compared to the manual process, ultimately
reducing time from data collection to actionable feedback for sites.


                                          6
Fig. 2 Illustrative differences in cross-site synthesis output by human and LLM (independently)
for telehealth and appointment management themes within the “Information and Communication
Technology” domain



2.2 Task 2. Refining Intervention Design: a Deductive
    Qualitative Analysis Task
Step 1: Define Task. In a prior study [29], researchers had developed and piloted a
practice transformation intervention based on primary care best practices to improve
type 2 diabetes patient outcomes at Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs). The
objective of Task 2 was to understand the alignment between aspects of diabetes care
organization and delivery targeted by the intervention (“practice areas”) and practices
observed at the 12 sites in this qualitative comparative case study in order to inform
refinement of the intervention for implementation in the next study phase. Specifically,
researchers developed a coding framework with 19 broad, semantic, topic summary-
type codes covering the practice areas [30]. LLMs were introduced to generate site-
level descriptions for each practice area code supported by evidence from interview
transcripts which researchers would analyze to modify components of the intervention.
The coding framework is available in Supplementary Information S2.3.

Step 2: Design human-LLM method. To inform development of the LLM-
integration approach, a researcher coded two interviews from one site for two practice


                                              7
Fig. 3 Final Task 1 human-LLM method. Step 1, qualitative researchers define domains and
create site-level summaries for each one. Step 2, LLM groups data for each domain into themes and
provides cross-site synthesis. Step 3, qualitative researcher modifies LLM thematic groups. Step 4,
qualitative researchers finalize cross-site synthesis for each domain, highlighting actionable insights
and best practices.



area codes of differing complexity: transportation accessibility (simple) and team-
based care (complex). After familiarization with the dataset, the researcher followed a
typical deductive coding process for each code: identifying relevant transcript excerpts,
then synthesizing and organizing findings based on their judgment of relevance to the
code. This process informed iterative development of a human-LLM deductive coding
method shown in Fig. 4.
    Using OpenAI’s ChatGPT-4o, we first aimed to identify transcript excerpts rele-
vant for each code. Prompting the model with an entire interview and code definition
yielded vague outputs that missed relevant information, consistent with evidence that
LLMs struggle with long-context inputs [31]. Given our goal to produce site-level
analysis, including all interviews per site within a single query was also infeasible:
the combined transcripts for each site averaged 157,179 tokens, and 6 of 12 sites
exceeded ChatGPT-4o’s 128k token context window limit [32]. We therefore imple-
mented retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) [33], which retrieves excerpts before
passing them to the LLM. Since abstract concepts such as “team-based care” could
not be easily captured through keyword retrieval, we used embedding-based retrieval
to surface semantically and contextually similar excerpts without requiring predefined
keywords.
    The manual approach highlighted that the researcher’s interpretations of code
definitions, domain expertise, and dataset familiarity guided how they identified rel-
evant excerpts. For example, the researcher coded excerpts about how teams worked


                                                  8
Fig. 4 The human-LLM coding method for each code. Researchers first generate sub-
questions for relevant aspects of the code, then discuss and refine them as a team to ensure alignment.
For each sub-question, researchers add two additional questions: 1) if there are examples in the
sub-question, the same question without examples (‘example’ bias), and 2) a question on the same
topic focused on challenges and barriers (‘positivity’ bias). Next, for each sub-question, we perform
Retrieval Augmented Generation: embedding-based retrieval identifies relevant excerpts, and the LLM
is prompted to answer using these excerpts. An automated script concatenates LLM outputs for all
questions into a single output, and merges duplicate bullet points tied to the same quote, and vali-
dates that all quotes appear in the interview text. Finally, the LLM sorts the validated bullet points,
which are then provided to the research team.



together to provide health education as “team-based care,” even though “health edu-
cation” was not explicit within the code definition. Connections between seemingly
disparate topics are commonly surfaced in qualitative analysis but are not reliably
captured by embedding-based retrieval because they depend on tacit knowledge,
contextual interpretation, and researcher expertise rather than lexical or semantic sim-
ilarity. Embedding models surface associations represented in their training data, and,
thus, may miss the novel or emergent connections that human analysts often iden-
tify. Furthermore, single-vector embeddings, such as OpenAI’s text-embedding-3-large
model, cannot capture the full range of relevance relationships between data points, a
limitation that amplifies as datasets grow [34].
    To capture excerpts not explicitly in code definitions but deemed relevant by
researchers, three researchers drafted and refined sub-questions for each code through
discussion and consensus [35]. Each sub-question targeted a single topic to yield specific


                                                  9
outputs [32]. Several sub-questions included examples of what researchers expected
based on their expertise and familiarization with the dataset, a common practice when
developing a qualitative codebook. Unlike humans who may read examples and simul-
taneously consider novel contexts, we observed that LLMs overfit to examples, likely
due to sycophancy bias [36] from training with reinforcement learning from human
feedback [37]. To counter this “example bias,” we posed each question twice—once
with and once without examples. We also observed a “positivity bias,” with LLM
responses emphasizing positive accounts of what sites were doing and underreport-
ing barriers or challenges. We paired each sub-question with a “counter-perspective”
question focused on barriers, similar to the established qualitative practice of seeking
“deviant cases” [38].
    For each sub-question of the code, we performed retrieval-augmented generation
(RAG). Reflecting what the team found effective in manual completion of the task
and in task 1, we instructed the LLM to produce three to five bullet points, each
with a one-sentence summary and illustrative quote. Our experimentation showed that
requiring a quote for each statement reduced hallucinations and was more efficient for
researchers than reviewing the full set of retrieved excerpts, which were difficult to
parse due to abrupt sentence breaks and irrelevant content.
    Finally, we aggregated bullet points across sub-questions for each code, removed
quotes duplicated across bullet points and verified quotes against transcripts using an
automated Python script. We then applied an LLM-as-judge approach to sort bullet
points by relevance [39] before providing them to the research team for analysis. LLM
prompts are available in Supplementary Information S3.2

Step 3: Evaluate human-LLM method at small-scale. We compared the LLM-
assisted method to manual coding of three interviews each from two FQHC sites (6
total interviews) for four codes of varying levels of conceptual complexity (digital
health, patient-provider relationship, defining roles and responsibilities, and patient
supports).
    Overall, the two methods differed in ways similar to how human researchers
interpret the same data from different perspectives. Human analysis produced more
detailed explanations with fewer quotes, whereas the LLM generated more summary
points and supporting quotes, often overlapping thematically due to similarity between
sub-questions within each code. Seeing the same theme supported by excerpts from
different parts of the dataset increased researchers’ confidence in the LLM-derived
findings. Consistent with Levitt & Saban [23], the human and LLM analyses also
identified complementary points: human analysis emphasized interpersonal dynamics,
whereas the LLM focused more on structures and processes (Fig. 5).
    A key limitation of the LLM output was that our use of RAG restricted its
understanding of the dataset to fragmented, decontextualized excerpts, whereas the
researcher read through every transcript for the site. Because the team was distributed
and site practices varied, not all codes were equally represented: researcher expertise
shaped conversation flow, and some codes (e.g., remote work) were irrelevant at cer-
tain sites. In these cases, retrieval surfaced low-similarity excerpts, which the LLM
treated as relevant without access to the broader dataset, resulting in an output of tan-
gentially related content. In contrast, the researcher noted reasons for the absence of


                                           10
Fig. 5 Different summary statement/quote points brought up by the human and LLMs
for the ‘patient–provider relationship’ code. Human focuses on interpersonal dynamics and
LLM on structures and processes. All other summary statement/quote points for this code were very
similar.



relevant material. Even when the researcher and LLM both selected the same quotes,
the LLM summaries often lacked perspective, overlooked context, and overgeneral-
ized their meaning, reasoning as if excerpts represented the entire site (Fig. 6). This
limitation was acute because, in our dataset, each interview reflected a distinct per-
spective requiring nuanced synthesis. These patterns mirror broader limitations of
LLMs: trained to produce complete-sounding outputs, they can overstate conclusions
even when information is insufficient [32].
    Our evaluation revealed that the human-LLM deductive coding method could
sufficiently organize and identify for analysis and interpretation by researchers.
Unlike human-generated coding outputs, however, LLM-generated summary state-
ments require greater researcher judgment to validate and contextualize due to the
LLM’s limited contextual understanding of the study goals and dataset.

Step 4: Apply and evaluate human-LLM method for entire task. Across
the 19 codes, the researchers developed 177 sub-questions, averaging 9 per code (4 – 15
sub-questions per topic). The final LLM output was structured as a matrix with codes
as columns and FQHC sites as rows. Each cell contained ∼30 bullet points per code
per site, with each bullet point pairing a summary statement and a supporting quote.
    Researchers examined the LLM output for each practice-area code to test hypothe-
ses informed by field experience from pilot implementations and interviews of the
cross-site case study comparison that they conducted. For example, they observed
post-COVID retention challenges at FQHCs. Findings from the “employee wellbeing”
and “organizational culture” codes confirmed staff retention as a widespread challenge
across all sites. Researchers then incorporated employee wellbeing innovations surfaced
through the analysis (e.g. building in opportunities for reflection or checking in) into
the intervention, although employee wellbeing was not part of the original interven-
tion or its underlying primary care framework [40]. Similarly, researchers hypothesized


                                               11
Fig. 6 Same quotes identified by human and LLM, summarized differently Even though
they both selected the same quotes, the LLM often overgeneralized their meaning. This limitation
was acute in our dataset, where each interview reflected a distinct perspective requiring nuanced
synthesis.




that fewer sites were practicing empanelment according to its definition (the assign-
ment of patients to providers), despite its centrality to many primary care models,
because it was hard to implement in practice. Analysis of the “patient–provider rela-
tionship” code confirmed this pattern, prompting a shift of focus from empanelment
to strategies maintaining strong patient–provider trust.
    Researchers typically reviewed the consolidated outputs for each code across sites
and consulted sub-question outputs for specific aspects of interest. Because Step 3
showed that summary statements required validation, they often revisited original
transcripts to gain more context, and attribute the output’s listing of the source inter-
view for facilitating efficient review. While researchers found the summary statements
useful for locating relevant quotes, they did not rely on them heavily for analysis.


                                               12
    Given a deadline for implementing the refined intervention nine months after col-
lecting data, incorporating findings from all practice areas and sites would have been
infeasible without LLMs. In Step 3, the qualitative researcher spent 20 hours coding
three transcripts for four codes: 3.5 hours reading through transcripts for entire site,
15 hours coding, and 1.5 hours synthesizing. At that pace, coding one site (∼13 inter-
views and 19 codes) would require 310 hours (7.75 workweeks) and all 12 sites nearly
two years of full-time work (93 workweeks). While not accounting for efficiency gains or
individual coding rate variation, these estimates illustrate the substantial time savings
of LLMs for qualitative analysis at scale.


3 Discussion
We demonstrated how large language models (LLMs) can be integrated into large,
multi-site qualitative health-services research through our structured framework that
preserves rigor while enabling efficiency. Our framework is especially suitable for
applied studies, such as ours, that seek to leverage LLMs to analyze large, het-
erogeneous datasets and produce outputs tailored to specific goals under time
constraints.
    Our framework guided our understanding of LLM capabilities within the context
of our study, informing our integration of LLMs into the research workflow. We used
LLMs primarily for organizational and high-level analytic steps, while reserving theory
development and generation of final insights for researchers. In Task 1, LLMs per-
formed on par with researchers in thematically organizing site-level summaries, but
they could not judge the relevance or novelty of insights. As a result, researchers relied
on LLM-organized data to construct the final cross-site syntheses. In Task 2, LLMs suc-
cessfully applied a deductive coding framework and identified relevant excerpts across
a large dataset, but frequently lacked perspective, overlooked context, or overgeneral-
ized from single data points in summarization. Consequently, researchers treated LLM
coding outputs differently from human-generated codes: researchers relied less on inter-
pretations and revisited data more often to ground findings in context. Furthermore,
researchers needed access to raw data to demonstrate how their final conclusions were
derived, and LLM-generated insights abstracted away both the data and analytic pro-
cess. This undermined transparency, credibility, reflexivity, and the ability to assess
potential biases in LLM-generated findings, such as the reinforcement of assumptions
embedded in questions or dominant discourses in training data. Our findings align
with prior human–AI collaboration literature underscoring the need for researchers to
retain interpretive control [9, 10]. We also extend prior work comparing humans and
LLM analysis capabilities [16–23] by showing how evaluations of human and LLM
abilities informed the design of our human–LLM methods.
    While our framework showed that LLMs could perform organizational, high-level
analytic steps effectively, these uses still posed risks to the quality of final interpreta-
tions. For instance, outputs could become generic, descriptive summaries when data
was fragmented or decontextualized. Completing tasks manually on a small scale pro-
vided a reference structure that helped us guide LLMs toward outputs clearly traceable
to source data, supporting more robust explanatory analysis. Another risk was that


                                            13
researchers could lose familiarity with the data if LLMs replaced activities such as
reading transcripts in full. We mitigated this by specifying at the beginning which
steps were essential for researchers to remain engaged with data. Furthermore, we
observed that variation within our dataset, an inevitable challenge of large, distributed
teams, introduced variability in model behavior, making the LLM’s organization less
consistent with the researcher’s. Small-scale evaluation helped us identify variability
and informed how the team interpreted resulting LLM outputs.
    Our interdisciplinary collaboration was essential for operationalizing our frame-
work, and required iteratively developing, evaluating, and implementing task-specific,
custom LLM-based tools and methods, as existing options were not viable. Open-
source software often relied on commercial APIs that were not secure for high-risk
data [14, 15]. Commercial platforms were prohibitively expensive, unable to handle
large datasets, and slow to receive institutional approval. Additionally, the propri-
etary nature of commercial tools reduces transparency in how they implement LLMs,
critical for methodological rigor, and limits researchers’ ability to judge appropriate
application. Existing options are also rigid: for instance, we could not find a tool that
supported specification of output requirements, comparative feedback from matrix
inputs, verbatim data reorganization rather than summarization. These limitations
matter, especially in applied studies, which often require unique analytic processes and
reporting structures, and show how existing tools fail to reflect the well-established
principle that task-specific methods are critical for rigorous human–AI collaboration
in qualitative analysis [9, 10].
    Iterative collaboration between computer science and qualitative researchers
allowed us to overcome these barriers. Computer science researchers enabled our team
to implement LLMs in a useful, productive way for our study (e.g., data-processing
pipelines based on the study’s existing infrastructure, build reusable prompts and API-
based workflows for scalable LLM use, and incorporation of technical innovations such
as embedding-based retrieval-augmented generation (RAG)). Qualitative researchers
guided technical development to address real analytic bottlenecks and ensured that
LLM use did not compromise analytic goals or core quality standards. Additionally,
our evaluations were informed both by how qualitative researchers would assess the
value of LLM assistance and by technical insights into model behavior and recent
advances in computer science. As suggested by prior research [7], having both per-
spectives was critical to integrating LLMs fruitfully into our ongoing research study,
likely explaining why so few projects to date have successfully embedded LLMs into
real-world qualitative studies.
    Our successful implementation of LLMs through our framework demonstrates their
value for analytic efficiency and research outcomes in large-scale, real-world quali-
tative studies. LLM use accelerated the generation of comparative feedback reports,
delivering more timely input to care teams, and enabled the incorporation of insights
from 167 transcripts into 19 practice areas of a practice transformation intervention
that will be implemented at eight FQHCs in the coming year and may reshape how
diabetes care is delivered at FQHCs more broadly. Limitations from our study suggest
that advances in LLM long-context reasoning and accessible domain knowledge trans-
fer may further improve LLM capabilities in qualitative analysis, as current models



                                           14
lacked the expertise and capacity to reason across large datasets required for generat-
ing insights directly from raw data. Future work should sustain collaboration between
qualitative and computer science researchers to ensure methods remain both tech-
nically robust and epistemologically grounded. Importantly, our framework can be
reapplied across analytic tasks and study contexts, and alongside rapid advances in
LLMs, creating opportunities for continued innovations in human–LLM integration
for qualitative analysis.

4 Methods
We integrated LLMs within the Implementing Scalable, PAtient-centered, Team-
based, Technology-enabled Care for Adults with Type 2 Diabetes (iPATH) research
study. This multi-year study involves a collaborative network of research teams from
Stanford, Harvard, The Ohio State University, and Impactivo, LLC and focuses
on practice-relevant research of diabetes care in federally qualified health centers
(FQHCs). Investigators collected interview data between April and December 2024
and performed analysis with LLM assistance. The study was approved by Advarra’s
Institutional Review Board (protocol ID Pro00071432).
    To comply with high-risk medical data security standards, we used the Stanford
SecureGPT [41] to access commercial LLMs via API, experimenting with models
including OpenAI’s ChatGPT-4o and o1, Google Gemini 2.5, Claude Sonnet 3.5, and
DeepSeek r1. ChatGPT-4o and o1 consistently followed instructions best and produced
the strongest interpretations.
Task 1. We developed a Python pipeline to transform an Excel matrix with domains,
domain definitions, and site-level summaries into prompts for an LLM and return
desired outputs into the study’s existing Microsoft Teams environment. Both Ope-
nAI models produced strong thematic organizations, but o1 offered greater depth in
summarization. To balance quality, cost, and efficiency, we used ChatGPT-4o for the-
matic organization and o1 for final cross-site summaries. Supplementary Information
S2 contains domains and definitions (S2.1) and prompts (S2.2).
Task 2. We built a locally run chat interface to experiment with question types,
output formats, and model configurations. Interview documents with metadata (i.e.
research team, site, interviewee role, and interviewee role category) were embed-
ded using OpenAI’s text-embedding-3-large model (the largest available through
SecureGPT) and stored in a Qdrant vector database [42], enabling pre-search fil-
tering. Users could filter by metadata, adjust model choice (e.g., ChatGPT-4o, o1),
parameters (temperature, token limit), retrieval settings (similarity threshold, num-
ber of results), and specify output formats before submitting questions. The interface
returned both the retrieved excerpts and the LLM outputs, providing transparency
into which data informed responses. After finalizing our settings and questions, the
interface supported grid-based analysis to compare outputs across metadata partitions,
which we used to construct the final output matrix.
    ChatGPT-4o and o1 performed comparably on both the RAG and sorting prompts.
ChatGPT-4o was selected for cost and efficiency. To reduce hallucinations, we set
model temperature to 0.0. We empirically determined a similarity threshold of 0.4


                                          15
captured meaningfully relevant excerpts, though we lowered it to 0.3 as some questions
returned no results at 0.4. The maximum output length was 4,000 tokens, the limit of
Stanford SecureGPT.
   Supplementary Information S3 contains each code and its researcher-developed
sub-questions (S3.1), prompts (S3.2), and more details on the interface developed to
generate analyses (S3.3).

Declarations
4.1 Author contribution
S.R. led the study, contributing towards conceptualization of research goals and
aims, data analysis, conducting of investigation, development of methodology, project
administration, producing software, preparation of presentation of work, and prepa-
ration and creation of draft. E.L.A. contributed to research goals and aims, data
curation, data analysis, development of methodology, supervision, and revisions of
draft. M.L. contributed to development of Task 2 methodology. R.R. and E.A. pro-
vided manuscript feedback. S.S. served as principal investigator and contributed
towards conceptualization of research goals and aims, data analysis, conducting of
investigation, development of methodology, supervision, funding acquisitions, project
administration, resources for study completion, and revisions of draft.

4.2 Funding
Research reported in this publication was supported by the National Institute On
Minority Health And Health Disparities of the National Institutes of Health under
Award Number R01MD017870. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors
and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health.
The funder played no role in study design, data collection, analysis and interpretation
of data, or the writing of this manuscript.

4.3 Acknowledgments
We gratefully acknowledge the organizations that participated in the comparative case
study (TBN), and the individuals who participated in study interviews. We thank Cati
Brown Johnson and Anna Sophia Lesios of the Evaluative Sciences Unit at Stanford
School of Medicine for their assistance with coding interview transcripts as part of our
human-LLM methodology testing.

4.4 Competing interests
All authors declare no financial or non-financial competing interests.

4.5 Data availability
The datasets generated and/or analyzed during the current study are not publicly
available due to the sensitive nature of the interview data and the risk of compromising


                                            16
participant confidentiality. De-identified excerpts relevant to the study findings are
available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.

4.6 Code availability
The underlying code for this study is available in a public Github repos-
itory, sronaghi/LLMsinQualAnalysis, and can be accessed via this link
https://github.com/sronaghi/LLMsinQualAnalysis.

4.7 Consent to Participate
All participants involved in generating analyses for human–LLM comparisons pro-
vided informed consent to participate. Participants involved in the interviews provided
informed consent under the Implementing Scalable, PAtient-centered, Team-based,
Technology-enabled Care for Adults with Type 2 Diabetes (iPATH) study, approved
by Advarra’s Institutional Review Board (IRB protocol Pro00071432).

References
 [1] Murphy, E. Qualitative Methods and Health Policy Research 1st edn (Routledge,
     New York, 2003).

 [2] Ramanadhan, S., Revette, A. C., Lee, R. M. & Aveling, E. L. Pragmatic
     approaches to analyzing qualitative data for implementation science: an introduc-
     tion. Implementation Science Communications 2, 70 (2021).

 [3] Acheampong, I. O. & Nyaaba, M. Review of qualitative research in the era of
     generative artificial intelligence. SSRN Electronic Journal (2024). URL https:
     //ssrn.com/abstract=4686920.

 [4] Hayes, A. S. “conversing” with qualitative data: Enhancing qualitative research
     through large language models (llms). International Journal of Qualitative Meth-
     ods 24 (2025). URL https://doi.org/10.1177/16094069251322346. Original work
     published 2025.

 [5] Friese, S. Conversational analysis with ai — ca to the power of ai: Rethinking
     coding in qualitative analysis. SSRN Electronic Journal (2025). URL https:
     //ssrn.com/abstract=5232579.

 [6] Morgan, D. L. Exploring the use of artificial intelligence for qualitative data
     analysis: The case of chatgpt. International Journal of Qualitative Methods 22,
     1–10 (2023). URL https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/1609406923
     1211248.

 [7] Schroeder, H., Quéré, M. A. L., Randazzo, C., Mimno, D. & Schoenebeck, S. Large
     language models in qualitative research: Uses, tensions, and intentions (2025).
     URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.07362. arXiv:2410.07362.


                                          17
 [8] Ashwin, J., Chhabra, A. & Rao, V. Using large language models for qualitative
     analysis can introduce serious bias (2023). URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.171
     47. arXiv:2309.17147.

 [9] Jiang, J. A., Wade, K., Fiesler, C. & Brubaker, J. R. Supporting serendipity:
     Opportunities and challenges for human-ai collaboration in qualitative analysis.
     Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 5 (2021). URL https://doi.org/10.1145/34
     49168.

[10] Feuston, J. L. & Brubaker, J. R. Putting tools in their place: The role of time
     and perspective in human-ai collaboration for qualitative analysis. Proc. ACM
     Hum.-Comput. Interact. 5 (2021). URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3479856.

[11] Liao, Z. et al. Llms as research tools: A large scale survey of researchers’ usage and
     perceptions (2024). URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.05025. arXiv:2411.05025.

[12] Narayanan, A. & Kapoor, S. AI Snake Oil: What Artificial Intelligence Can
     Do, What It Can’t, and How to Tell the Difference (Princeton University Press,
     Princeton, NJ, 2024).

[13] Tracy, S. J. Qualitative quality: Eight “big-tent” criteria for excellent qualitative
     research. Qualitative Inquiry 16, 837–851 (2010).

[14] Lam, M. S., Teoh, J., Landay, J., Heer, J. & Bernstein, M. S. Concept induction:
     Analyzing unstructured text with high-level concepts using lloom. Proceedings
     of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (2024).
     URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:269214633.

[15] Gao, J. et al. Collabcoder: A lower-barrier, rigorous workflow for inductive col-
     laborative qualitative analysis with large language models (2024). URL https:
     //arxiv.org/abs/2304.07366. arXiv:2304.07366.

[16] Tai, R. H. et al. An examination of the use of large language models to aid
     analysis of textual data. International Journal of Qualitative Methods 23, 1–14
     (2024). URL https://doi.org/10.1177/16094069241231168.

[17] Liu, X. et al. Qualitative coding with gpt-4: Where it works better. Journal of
     Learning Analytics 12, 169–185 (2025). URL https://learning-analytics.info/in
     dex.php/JLA/article/view/8575.

[18] Than, N., Fan, L., Law, T., Nelson, L. K. & McCall, L. Qualitative coding with
     generative large language models. Sociological Methods & Research 54, 849–888
     (2025). URL https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/004912412513391
     88.

[19] Dunivin, Z. O. Scalable qualitative coding with llms: Chain-of-thought reasoning
     matches human performance in some hermeneutic tasks (2024). URL https:


                                            18
    //arxiv.org/abs/2401.15170. arXiv:2401.15170.

[20] Wachinger, J., Bärnighausen, K., Schäfer, L. N., Scott, K. & McMahon, S. A.
     Prompts, pearls, imperfections: Comparing chatgpt and a human researcher in
     qualitative data analysis. Qualitative Health Research 35, 951–966 (2025). URL
     https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/10497323241244669.

[21] Parkington, K. et al. Human vs. llm-based thematic analysis for digital
     mental health research: Proof-of-concept comparative study. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2507.08002 (2025).

[22] Naeem, M., Smith, T. & Thomas, L. Thematic analysis and artificial intelligence:
     A step-by-step process for using chatgpt in thematic analysis. International Jour-
     nal of Qualitative Methods 24, 1–13 (2025). URL https://doi.org/10.1177/1609
     4069251333886.

[23] Levit, N. S. & Saban, M. When investigator meets large language models: a qual-
     itative analysis of cancer patient decision-making journeys. npj Digital Medicine
     8, 336 (2025). URL https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-025-01747-3.

[24] Singer, S. R01: Implementing scalable, patient-centered team-based care for
     adults with type 2 diabetes and health disparities (ipath). Rethinking Clinical
     Trials — demonstration project overview (2025). URL https://rethinkingclinical
     trials.org/demonstration-projects/ipath/. https://rethinkingclinicaltrials.org/d
     emonstration-projects/ipath/.

[25] Levitt, H. M., Ipekci, B., Morrill, Z. & Rizo, J. L. Intersubjective recognition as
     the methodological enactment of epistemic privilege: A critical basis for consensus
     and intersubjective confirmation procedures. Qualitative Psychology 8, 407–427
     (2021).

[26] Pownall, M. Is replication possible in qualitative research? a response to makel
     et al. (2022). Educational Research and Evaluation 29, 1–7 (2024). URL https:
     //www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/13803611.2024.2314526.

[27] Bodenheimer, T., Wagner, E. H. & Grumbach, K. Improving primary care for
     patients with chronic illness: The chronic care model, part 2. JAMA 288, 1909–
     1914 (2002). URL https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.288.15.1909.

[28] Brown, T. B. et al. Language models are few-shot learners (2020). URL https:
     //arxiv.org/abs/2005.14165. arXiv:2005.14165.

[29] Impactivo. Patient-Centered Medical Home Transformation Series Handbook
     (Impactivo, 2019).

[30] Braun, V. & Clarke, V. Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative
     Research in Psychology 3, 77–101 (2006). URL https://doi.org/10.1191/147808


                                          19
    8706qp063oa.

[31] Liu, N. F. et al. Lost in the middle: How language models use long contexts
     (2023). URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.03172. arXiv:2307.03172.

[32] OpenAI et al. Gpt-4 technical report (2024). URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.0
     8774. arXiv:2303.08774.

[33] Lewis, P. et al. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks
     (2021). URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.11401. arXiv:2005.11401.

[34] Weller, O., Boratko, M., Naim, I. & Lee, J. On the theoretical limitations of
     embedding-based retrieval. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.21038 (2025).

[35] Richards, K. A. R. & Hemphill, M. A. A practical guide to collaborative qual-
     itative data analysis. Journal of Teaching in Physical Education 37, 225–231
     (2018). URL https://doi.org/10.1123/jtpe.2017-0084.

[36] Perez, E. et al. Discovering language model behaviors with model-written
     evaluations (2022). URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.09251. arXiv:2212.09251.

[37] Ouyang, L. et al. Training language models to follow instructions with human
     feedback (2022). URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.02155. arXiv:2203.02155.

[38] Anderson, C. Presenting and evaluating qualitative research. American Journal
     of Pharmaceutical Education 74, 141 (2010). URL https://doi.org/10.5688/aj74
     08141.

[39] Gu, J. et al. A survey on llm-as-a-judge (2025). URL https://arxiv.org/abs/24
     11.15594. arXiv:2411.15594.

[40] Hahn, K. A., Gonzalez, M. M., Etz, R. S. & Crabtree, B. F. National committee
     for quality assurance (ncqa) patient-centered medical home (pcmh) recognition
     is suboptimal even among innovative primary care practices. Journal of the
     American Board of Family Medicine 27, 312–313 (2014).

[41] Ng, M. Y., Helzer, J., Pfeffer, M. A., Seto, T. & Hernandez-Boussard, T. Devel-
     opment of secure infrastructure for advancing generative ai research in healthcare
     at an academic medical center. Research Square rs.3.rs–5095287 (2024). URL
     https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-5095287/v1.

[42] Qdrant. qdrant/qdrant. https://github.com/qdrant/qdrant (2025). GitHub
     repository.




                                          20
