2066resprotJMIR Research ProtocolsJMIR Res ProtocJMIR Publications 
Inc.PMC1309902713099027130990274201342110.2196/82725Use of an AI-Based Tool (Human Experiences and Reflections Data 
Connector) to Improve Discovery and Reuse of Archived Qualitative Data: Protocol for an Algorithm Development and 
Validation StudyLeonardTammyPhD12*StimpsonJim PPhD123CanoMiguel 
ÁngelPhD4ShiWenqiPhD5AbaraguAdaBS1ZhangSongPhD5SarvestanJavad1Department of Health Economics, Systems, and Policy, 
Peter O'Donnell Jr. School of Public Health, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 5323 Harry Hines 
Boulevard, Dallas, TX, 75390, United States, 1 21464831552Harold C. Simmons Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of 
Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, United States3Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, 
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, United States4Department of Social and Behavioral 
Sciences, Peter O'Donnell Jr. School of Public Health, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, 
United States5Department of Health Data Science and Biostatistics, Peter O'Donnell Jr. School of Public Health, 
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, United States*Tammy Leonard, PhD, Department of Health 
Economics, Systems, and Policy, Peter O'Donnell Jr. School of Public Health, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, 5323 Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, TX, 75390, United States, 1 2146483155; 
Tammy.Leonard@UTSouthwestern.edu214202615e82725e827252242026Copyright © Tammy Leonard, Jim P Stimpson, Miguel Ángel 
Cano, Wenqi Shi, Ada Abaragu, Song Zhang. Originally published in JMIR Research Protocols 
(https://www.researchprotocols.org)This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons 
Attribution License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and 
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work, first published in JMIR Research Protocols, is properly cited. 
The complete bibliographic information, a link to the original publication on https://www.researchprotocols.org, as 
well as this copyright and license information must be included.AbstractBackgroundDespite the growing emphasis on open 
science and equity in research, qualitative data capturing diverse human experiences and perspectives are rarely reused 
beyond the original study. Increasingly, data repositories are used to make these data publicly available, but it is 
unclear whether these data can be effectively identified by researchers interested in secondary data 
analysis.ObjectiveWe describe a protocol for identifying and characterizing archived qualitative datasets in leading 
public repositories, developing an artificial intelligence–based tool to enhance qualitative data reuse, and validating 
that tool using existing data.MethodsWe will search 4 leading repositories to assess the scope and identifiability of 
existing publicly available qualitative datasets. We will subsequently build the Human Experiences and Reflections 
(HEARs) Archive, a directory of deidentified study data that is only accessible indirectly through the use of the HEARs 
Portal. The HEARs Portal will be supported by large language model–based tools using the retrieval-augmented generation 
framework. The artificial intelligence tools’ performance will be assessed across 3 domains: relevance of identified 
studies, validity as evaluated by comparison with human qualitative data analysis, and robustness against the addition 
of irrelevant information.ResultsA preliminary review of existing data repositories has begun. The anticipated study 
completion date is December 31, 2026.ConclusionsThe proposed project will provide evidence regarding the existing 
capacity for identifying and accessing qualitative data through leading repositories. It will also provide evidence on 
the validity of the HEARs Data Connector for identifying and describing qualitative datasets in ways that can assist 
researchers interested in secondary analysis. Establishing the validity of the HEARs Data Connector and developing an 
evidence-based ongoing improvement and monitoring strategy will be essential for establishing trust within the 
qualitative research 
community.statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoR
eceived 2025 Aug 20; Revised 2026 Feb 24; Accepted 2026 Feb 25; Collection date 2026.IntroductionBackgroundMost 
scientific research conducted in the health, social, economic, and behavioral sciences, and related fields is aimed at 
improving human welfare. As public demand for “evidence-based” solutions continues to grow, there is often an implicit 
emphasis on quantitative evidence. However, qualitative data—data derived from transcribed conversations, open-ended 
survey questions, or original text from archival materials [1]—are essential for keeping research grounded in 
real-world experiences and responsive to social and contextual challenges [2]. Qualitative methods can lead to the 
discovery of determinants that influence behavior, help enhance the scientific rigor of research, facilitate the 
translation of observational data into interventions, and improve the likelihood that interventions implemented are 
sustainable and acceptable in the target population [3-7]. Much of the evidence base for programs to improve human 
welfare is derived from survey or administrative data that are coded numerically and then analyzed using statistical 
methods. However, data only exist to measure things that some researcher or administrator chose to collect [8]. 
Qualitative data are the basis of information from which those choices can be best informed. Importantly, qualitative 
data often return unexpected responses to a question because respondents are not told a priori what response 
possibilities the researcher has in mind. Qualitative data are necessary to inform accurate interpretation of 
quantitative results, develop hypotheses and research questions regarding the populations of interest, and improve the 
relevance of evidence-based solutions—especially those created to serve populations whose perspectives differ from 
those of the mainstream.Importance of Qualitative Data Sharing and ReuseQualitative data are costly to collect, and 
economies of scale for qualitative data collection are less attainable compared to quantitative data. As a result, 
there are unique economic barriers to increasing the use and impact of qualitative data. Each new instance of interview 
or focus group data collection requires the same additional researcher time to administer, record, and transcribe the 
data. In contrast, once quantitative data collection instruments are developed, they can generally be scaled to collect 
large sample sizes with little additional cost beyond participant recruitment. Despite numerous calls for greater data 
sharing and reuse and the existence of many large data repositories, secondary analysis of qualitative data is 
extremely rare. This is regrettably inefficient considering the potential benefits that can come from the reuse of 
qualitative data and the high cost of primary qualitative data collection.Increased capacity for sharing and combining 
qualitative data from multiple studies has been identified as an important goal for improving research reliability and 
relevance. The Joint Declaration of Data Citation Principles highlights this prioritization within the scientific 
community by making greater access to data for the purpose of secondary analysis a critical goal [9]. As with 
quantitative data, data sharing is essential for ensuring that analysis is reproducible. However, this concern is 
heightened in the case of qualitative data, where analysis can be more heavily influenced by the skill set and 
perspective of the researcher [10]. Could a different qualitative researcher interpret the same dataset differently? 
Secondary analysis of qualitative data is also important for facilitating faster dissemination links, whereby new 
research questions emerge from existing data. Could a researcher from a different disciplinary background analyze the 
same dataset but extract themes that inform important ongoing work different from the original study? Meta-analysis of 
qualitative datasets and meta-synthesis of qualitative data findings have shown promise for identifying new research 
evidence from existing data, but they have largely failed to reach their potential because of the difficulty in 
identifying and accessing related qualitative studies [11,12]. Finally, qualitative data, when shared, can allow future 
researchers to identify the early developments of new social challenges that were not even being considered by 
researchers at the time of data collection [8].Challenges to Qualitative Data Sharing and ReuseData repositories are 
increasingly being used to deposit qualitative data for reuse, and some are being created for the sole purpose of 
facilitating the sharing of qualitative data. However, there remain gaps between the vision (easy sharing and robust 
reuse of qualitative data) and the reality (sharing is possible, but reuse is infrequent). First, qualitative data are 
not easy to identify within repositories that also contain quantitative data. Repositories do not generally provide 
filters that allow searchers to distinguish between quantitative and qualitative data types. Second, across all 
repository types, qualitative data are often stored behind firewalls to protect the confidentiality of human 
participants, and institutional review board (IRB) approval is often required just to inspect the data and assess its 
suitability for a planned research project. Third, guidelines for sharing qualitative data through repositories are 
varied and often lacking altogether. In a review of 32 English-language multidisciplinary or social science data 
repositories, only 12 had qualitative data sharing guidelines, and most guidelines remained vague regarding the removal 
of indirect identifiers [1]. Fourth, when qualitative data can be obtained, it requires additional time inputs to 
review and assess whether there is sufficient content related to desired themes to warrant use in secondary 
analysis.Opportunities related to the better use of qualitative data are being explored. ChatGPT has been shown to 
perform “reasonably well” in identifying themes within qualitative datasets, but has some noted shortcomings when 
themes are subtle or require nuanced interpretations [13-15]. However, artificial intelligence (AI) has not been 
examined as a tool specifically adapted to engage in meta-analysis of qualitative datasets while incorporating core 
methodological insights of the qualitative field—especially through the development of appropriate metadata to prompt 
the AI regarding the unique study context and nuance. Researchers are also engaging in greater sharing of qualitative 
data by building large open-access qualitative datasets to improve monitoring of the evolution of social processes and 
outcomes. For example, the American Voices Project is building a large, repeated cross-sectional repository of 
immersive interviews from across the United States.The Human Experiences and Reflections Data ConnectorThe Human 
Experiences and Reflections (HEARs) Data Connector will fill existing gaps to improve qualitative data sharing and 
reuse capacity. Importantly, the HEARs Data Connector is intended to complement existing repositories and collaborate 
with the services they provide. For the purposes of this protocol, we focus on qualitative data collected within 
research studies, which most often includes transcripts from interviews, focus groups, or ethnographic observations. We 
also limit our work to English-language text, although we hope to remove this restriction in future studies. The HEARs 
Data Connector consists of 2 parts: the HEARs Archive and the HEARs Portal.The HEARs Archive will house deidentified 
qualitative data, serving as a foundational knowledge base for the HEARs Portal. Unlike traditional data repositories, 
it will not provide users with direct access to the underlying data. Instead, it will support the Portal’s 
functionality by enabling data-informed tools and resources. The HEARs Data Connector intends to provide a “middle 
ground” solution to address the complex challenges related to qualitative data sharing. Deidentified qualitative data 
can inform summary information accessed by researchers through the HEARs Portal, but direct access to the data itself 
must be obtained through collaboration with the original investigator or their designee, or by accessing data in an 
existing public repository. Thus, it allows for data discovery and facilitates reuse, while allowing for heterogeneous, 
context-specific approaches to ethical data sharing.The HEARs Portal will be powered by AI and will allow users to 
perform advanced queries of the HEARs Archive. These queries will generate summaries of key themes within the archive 
and identify the studies that contributed to each thematic result. To support transparency and reproducibility, the 
HEARs Portal will display links to the specific studies that contributed to each thematic summary, enabling users to 
review the source material and assess the analytic pathway. The Portal will provide sufficient detail to support 
hypothesis generation, guide the selection of qualitative datasets for secondary analysis, and provide information on 
how to request access to those datasets, such as through links to existing repositories.The purpose of this protocol is 
to describe the initial development of the HEARs Data Connector. We will describe the planned foundational research to 
establish the availability of existing data that can be used within HEARs, as well as the development of the first 
HEARs demonstration project and its associated performance evaluation.MethodsStudy DesignThe study protocol is 
organized into 2 primary phases. Phase 1 encompasses the development and curation of the HEARs Archive, a specialized 
knowledge base of qualitative research data. This phase involves identifying and acquiring relevant datasets from 
established repositories, securing investigator permissions, and applying a rigorous preprocessing and deidentification 
workflow. Phase 2 details the design, implementation, and validation of the HEARs Portal, a web-based tool powered by 
large language models (LLMs) for querying the HEARs Archive. Specifically, the HEARs Portal allows researchers to query 
the HEARs Archive, identify related studies from a large sample of qualitative datasets, conduct preliminary 
descriptive meta-analyses of the datasets in response to queries, and obtain descriptions of the available datasets 
related to the query (eg, instructions for accessing the data from the investigator or their designee, publications 
associated with the dataset, study setting, and context). The HEARs Portal will be powered by LLMs with a hybrid 
retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) framework, whose performance is optimized through synergistic metadata and prompt 
design. We will assess the performance of the HEARs Portal across 3 domains: relevance of identified studies in the 
HEARs Archive, validity by comparison with human qualitative data analysis, and robustness against the addition of 
irrelevant information within the HEARs Archive.Patient and Public InvolvementWe do not plan for direct patient or 
public involvement in the designing, conducting, or reporting of this project because its main objective is to develop 
the HEARs Data Connector, which is primarily a technical task. However, patient and public involvement is anticipated 
in subsequent projects using and refining the tool for applied use.Phase 1: HEARs ArchiveSample SelectionWe have 
identified 4 leading US-based data repositories that are likely to contain qualitative datasets: Open Science 
Framework, Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research, Qualitative Data Repository, and Harvard 
Dataverse. These repositories are maintained by nonprofit organizations (The Center for Open Science) or academic 
institutions (University of Michigan, Syracuse University, and Harvard University, respectively) and have been built to 
promote data sharing among academic researchers. We will first meet with representatives from each repository to 
understand how best to identify qualitative datasets and use the repositories’ query tools. Next, we will attempt to 
identify all qualitative datasets available within each repository. From the available studies, we will attempt to 
identify clusters of topically related studies and select one or more clusters from which to develop and test the HEARs 
Portal. The goal of identifying clusters is simply to drive efficiency in our initial development of the HEARs Data 
Connector; thus, we will not use a strict methodology in identifying clusters. We simply seek to find topical areas 
where there are multiple related studies, and we will prioritize adding studies from these topical areas to the HEARs 
Archive first to begin development and testing of the portal regarding how it uses information from related studies. We 
will populate the HEARs Archive with deidentified qualitative datasets, including studies from the identified clusters. 
We will prioritize populating the HEARs Archive with studies from any repository that are topically related to the 
cluster that was identified. Before including any study in the HEARs Archive—even studies that are publicly available 
for download—we will seek permission from the study’s principal investigator and obtain evidence that the data were 
collected under the supervision of an IRB.Preprocessing and DeidentificationTo prepare the raw data for the HEARs 
Portal, each transcript will undergo a systematic preprocessing and curation workflow to transform it into an indexed, 
queryable record within the HEARs Archive. First, to ensure participant confidentiality, all transcripts will be 
deidentified using a Python-based anonymization pipeline and named entity recognition models to automatically detect 
and redact direct identifiers (eg, names, locations, and so on) and quasi-identifiers. We will test the success of 
anonymization by manually reviewing a 25% sample of the anonymized data.Repository StructureEach separate file within 
the repository will be labeled with a 2-part identifier: study ID and record ID. The 7-digit study ID will be unique to 
each study. The 4-digit record ID will be unique within each study ID. Metadata will then be created for each 2-part 
identifier. This will allow metadata to identify both characteristics that apply to an entire study (eg, study settings 
and study authors) as well as characteristics unique to a particular study record (eg, race or ethnicity of the 
participant). The repository data will be stored in a secure, encrypted, and password-protected drive in compliance 
with IRB requirements.Metadata fields are described in Table 1. Study-level metadata fields include those describing 
the overall study, the methods used to collect the data, the type and size of study data, and publications related to 
the study data. Record-level metadata fields describe the record and the characteristics of the participants who 
provided information for the record. Study-level metadata will be made available so that users of the HEARs Portal can 
know the full list of studies that are being used. We will implement Schema.org/Dataset via JSON-LD to ensure indexing 
of metadata can be completed by general search engines like Google Dataset Search, and we will also align our metadata 
schema with the Data Documentation Initiative Codebook or Lifecycle standard for deep research interoperability. 
Additionally, we will map our metadata fields (Table 1) by implementing a hybrid ontology mapping that uses the 
European Language Social Science Thesaurus and MeSH (Medical Subject Headings). Furthermore, the named entity 
recognition models used in our preprocessing pipeline will be tuned to recognize and align entities with these 
ontologies during the indexing phase.Table 1. Human Experiences and Reflections (HEARs) Archive metadata fields.Field 
category and nameField levelExampleaStudy description Study IDStudy7801004 Study principal investigatorStudyJohn 
Smith Study titleStudyCaregiver impact on adherence to discharge instructions Study purpose or summaryStudyFollowing an 
acute illness, patients may be overwhelmed with discharge instructions. This study explores the ability of patients to 
understand and adhere to instructions upon hospital discharge. A qualitative design of interviews with 63 patients and 
caregivers was used. Data were collected within 3 weeks of discharge from hospital. SubjectStudyMedicine, health, and 
life sciences Institutional review board of recordStudyUniversity of Texas SouthwesternStudy methods Study 
designStudyRandomized controlled trial Mode of data collectionStudyFace-to-face interview Recruitment methodStudyRandom 
sample Time periodStudy2016-2017 Geographic coverageStudyAlabama, United StatesStudy data Number of participants in 
studyStudy126 Number of recordsStudy63 Data typesStudyCoded qualitative dataStudy publications Related 
publication(s)StudySmith, John. 2019. Protocol for Caregiver Impact on Adherence to Discharge Instructions. Protocol 
Journal. 54(2), p111-123 Repository archiveStudyQualitative data repository Repository archive 
identifierStudyhttps://doi.org/12.7066/F9MKT6G Contact for more informationStudyPlease refer to instructions at 
repository.Record characteristics Record identifierRecord5460 Number of participants in recordRecord2 Data collection 
methodRecordInterview Year of data collectionRecord2017Participant race or ethnic composition Non-Hispanic 
BlackRecord50% Non-Hispanic WhiteRecord50% AsianRecord0% HispanicRecord0% American Indian or Alaskan 
NativeRecord0% Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific IslanderRecord0%Participant 
gender ManRecord50% WomanRecord50% NonbinaryRecord0%Participant age (y) 0‐18Record0 19‐65Record100 >65Record0aThe 
example provided is not a real study.Phase 2: HEARs Portal DesignOverviewWe will develop the HEARs Portal using a 
hybrid RAG framework to improve the accuracy and reliability of LLMs for analyzing the HEARs repository [16]. We will 
leverage the application programming interface–based GPT-series LLMs from the Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act (HIPAA)-compliant Microsoft Azure OpenAI service as backbone LLMs. The user workflow is explicitly 
designed as two linked stages: (1) a hybrid retrieval process to identify relevant information and (2) a contextualized 
generation process to synthesize that information into a coherent response.The HEARs Portal will identify relevant 
studies within the repository, summarize key concepts and themes related to the research question contained within 
these studies, and provide a list of related questions that may be further investigated using the available data in the 
repository. Users will then have the ability to engage in translation by repeating this process to query competing 
interpretations and further related questions. With each response, the HEARs Portal will provide a complete list of 
studies from which the results were obtained, along with summary metadata about the study elements contributing to the 
response. Importantly, the HEARs Portal will provide a summary of the range of responses to particular questions or 
thematic analyses alongside the frequency of elements providing support for each response.Stage 1: Hybrid Information 
RetrievalWe will first create a web interface for querying the AI tool and provide instructions and examples to guide 
effective use [17]. The instructions will guide users in iteratively using the AI tool in alignment with established 
methods for meta-analysis of qualitative data steps [11]. When a user submits a research query, the Portal initiates a 
sophisticated retrieval process designed to locate the most relevant information from the HEARs Archive. To maximize 
both precision and comprehensiveness, we will use a hybrid retrieval strategy that combines 2 distinct modes of search. 
First, in explicit search (metadata filtering), users can leverage the rich, structured metadata to perform targeted 
database-style queries. This allows researchers to narrow the search space to studies or records with specific 
characteristics (eg, “all interviews with female participants over the age of 65 years from randomized controlled 
trials”). This acts as a powerful preliminary filter. Second, in implicit search (content-based retrieval), to search 
the textual content of the transcripts (especially when metadata is incomplete), the Portal will use a combination of 
state-of-the-art retrieval models to ensure that the results are relevant both lexically and semantically. A sparse 
retriever, such as a term-frequency model like BM25 [18], will identify documents based on keyword overlap, excelling 
at matching specific terms. Concurrently, a dense retriever built from text-embedding-3-large embeddings (deployed in 
our secure Azure environment), with candidate lists fused using reciprocal rank fusion and then reranked using the 
bge-reranker-large cross-encoder model (Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence), will use a semantic similarity 
model like DRAGON [19] to generate vector embeddings to retrieve passages that are contextually related to the query, 
even without direct keyword matches. The outputs from both retrievers will be fused and reranked to create an optimized 
context for the generation stage.Stage 2: Contextualized GenerationIn the generation stage, the retrieved text chunks 
and their associated metadata are fed to an LLM, which synthesizes the information into a coherent, evidence-based 
narrative. To manage hallucination and ensure traceable attribution, generation will be strictly retrieval-gated with 
versioned prompt templates that instruct the model to use only the provided evidence and to abstain when evidence is 
insufficient. Pydantic models will be used to enforce a strict JSON schema on responses, including (1) a theme or 
summary section, (2) a complete list of contributing study IDs, and (3) chunk-level evidence pointers for each major 
claim. We will implement automated “no phantom citation” checks that verify every cited study or chunk is present in 
the retrieved context, and we will treat retrieved transcript text as untrusted input (explicitly disabling 
instruction-following from the corpus) to reduce prompt-injection risk. The Portal will surface citations as 
study-level identifiers with repository links and an auditable mapping from each synthesized theme to the supporting 
studies or records, enabling users to verify provenance and supporting evidence.While the procedures described are the 
current most plausible baseline design choices for each component, we recognize that these are inherently empirical 
decisions; accordingly, we will systematically test reasonable alternatives and select the configuration that performs 
best on our expert-labeled validation benchmarks.Data AnalysisWe will validate the HEARs Portal’s performance across 
several areas: identification of relevant studies, agreement with human analysis of qualitative data, and stability in 
response to the addition of irrelevant information. First, we will validate that the Portal is able to accurately 
identify relevant studies and return accurate summaries of the metadata from those studies. To do this, we will assess 
the accuracy of the retrieval system by comparing its output against a gold-standard evaluation set created by human 
domain experts. For a diverse set of test queries, we will use standard information retrieval metrics, including 
precision@k, recall@k, and mean reciprocal rank, to quantify the system’s ability to retrieve relevant documents within 
the top-ranked results. We will also query the HEARs Portal on subject matter not included in the Archive and test 
whether the HEARs Portal is able to accurately assess when there is no relevant information available for a given 
query. Next, we will test for agreement with thematic analysis of qualitative data. We will use peer-reviewed and 
published studies recording primary analysis of datasets in the HEARs Archive and assess how well the Portal, when 
examining only a single study, is able to reproduce the results. We will also conduct a meta-analysis of related 
studies published in the peer-reviewed literature and compare that analysis to results returned from the HEARs Portal 
when examining data from all studies represented in the meta-analysis. Finally, we will examine the stability of the 
HEARs Portal by exposing it incrementally to additional studies contained within the full HEARs Archive and repeating 
the analysis above. We will assess the extent to which responses to queries change when seemingly unrelated, irrelevant 
studies are added to the corpus of materials examined by the Portal.Reproducibility and SharingWe will develop and 
maintain Docker containers [20] that capture the complete runtime environment, including all dependencies (Python 
packages, embedding models, and retrieval frameworks), library versions, and configurations. We will make Docker images 
available through a public registry (eg, Docker Hub) alongside version-controlled source code. This will enable users 
and reviewers to verify and reproduce our validation experiments.Each query of the HEARs portal will generate a 
persistent ID. The persistent ID will capture the exact query parameters, the specific version of the HEARs Archive 
queried, and the AI model version used. This will ensure that researchers can cite the specific synthesis provided by 
the HEARs Portal and thus allow for verification of the analytic pathway.Ethical ConsiderationsThis study has been 
approved by the IRB at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center (STU-2024-1045). We have received a waiver 
of informed consent for our analysis of secondary data. All data will be deidentified and anonymized prior to inclusion 
in the HEARs archive. We are not enrolling any participants for primary data collection; hence, there is no participant 
compensation in this study.Dissemination PlanStudy results will be disseminated via peer-reviewed studies and 
presentations at academic conferences. We anticipate at least 2 studies from this work: the first reporting on the 
availability and ease of accessing qualitative data from existing repositories, and the second reporting on the 
validation of the HEARs AI tool.The HEARs Data Connector will become publicly available through a web portal. Users 
will be required to register prior to using HEARs. We will also work to disseminate our efforts in collaboration with 
the leadership of other large repositories. Since the HEARs repository will not allow users to access the raw data, we 
aim to form collaborative relationships with other established repositories so that HEARs can provide incremental 
benefits by allowing the discovery of qualitative data without redundantly taking on the task of archiving the data for 
others to access.Following the initial development and evaluation of the HEARs portal, we will consult with a broad 
range of stakeholders (eg, repository representatives, researchers, librarians, and funding agency representatives) to 
discuss our findings and identify next steps for improving HEARs in future projects. We anticipate some of these areas 
might include the development of strategies to improve the quantity and quality of data in the HEARs archive, 
investments to improve the sustainability of HEARs, and improvements to metadata and AI tools. Currently, HEARs will be 
hosted and maintained locally at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center; findings from this protocol will 
inform recommendations for maintaining or adjusting this plan.ResultsAs of February 6, 2026, we have completed work to 
establish protocols for the identification and processing of studies for inclusion in HEARs. Specifically, we have 
developed and tested procedures for searching for qualitative studies in existing archives (Open Science Framework, 
Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research, Qualitative Data Repository, and Harvard Dataverse), and 
we have met with representatives from each of the archives to obtain input on our procedures. We have also developed 
protocols for receiving studies into the HEARs portal. Additionally, we have developed tools in REDCap (Research 
Electronic Data Capture, Vanderbilt University) to collect metadata about each study, developed and tested an AI tool 
to deidentify qualitative data, and piloted all of these processes across 2 existing studies conducted by collaborators 
of our core research team. We have also begun work to identify qualitative studies available in existing repositories. 
We anticipate publishing the results of that formative investigation in Fall 2026.DiscussionThe HEARs Data Connector 
offers the potential to improve the scientific knowledge creation system by making it easier for existing qualitative 
data to be reused to inform new study development, in secondary analysis to obtain additional insights, or to provide 
context in the interpretation of quantitative results when qualitative data were not collected. Because qualitative 
data are the foundation upon which decisions regarding the scope of quantitative data collection (eg, what survey 
questions to ask) are made and the interpretation of quantitative data analysis is undertaken, the benefits of being 
able to reuse existing qualitative data more easily are likely significant. Anticipated findings of the project 
described in this protocol include the creation of a pilot version of the HEARs Data Connector that can be used to 
demonstrate its effectiveness in improving capacity for qualitative data reuse.Obtaining data to populate the HEARs 
Archive is essential for its long-term success. Our work will illuminate potential gaps in the existing practice of 
qualitative data sharing as we explore the capacity for including studies from existing repositories into the HEARs 
Archive. The work is likely to inform new collaborative approaches between researchers and repository managers that can 
improve the efficiency of secondary analysis of qualitative data. It might also inform ongoing questions regarding the 
refinement of methods for the secondary analysis of qualitative data [21].Our project, if successful, will demonstrate 
an innovative use of AI in qualitative research. Numerous ongoing studies are attempting to use AI to speed up the 
primary analysis of qualitative data and have identified challenges that the field is working to overcome [22-24]. Our 
use of AI is more limited in scope and perhaps more suited to the strengths of current-generation AI tools [25], in 
that we are not attempting to analyze qualitative data with the HEARs Portal, but rather to identify and describe 
qualitative data resources that can be used in human- or machine-based analysis.Validation of the initial 
implementation of the HEARs Data Connector will be essential for establishing efficacy and informing future 
improvements to the Data Connector. The HEARs Data Connector’s long-term success will largely be determined by the 
willingness of researchers and repository leaders to adopt the tool [26]. While guidelines for evaluating the ethical 
and scientifically grounded use of AI for the novel application we propose are not available, our results can be 
compared to established principles related to AI use in other contexts [27,28]. Establishing the validity of the tool’s 
output and developing an evidence-based, ongoing improvement and monitoring strategy will be essential for establishing 
trust within the qualitative research community.AcknowledgmentsNo generative artificial intelligence tools were used in 
the production of this manuscript.AbbreviationsAIartificial intelligenceHEARsHuman Experiences and 
ReflectionsHIPAAHealth Insurance Portability and Accountability ActIRBinstitutional review boardLLMlarge language 
modelMeSHMedical Subject HeadingsRAGretrieval-augmented generationREDCapResearch Electronic Data 
CaptureFootnotesFunding: This research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the public, commercial, or 
not-for-profit sectors.Authors’ Contributions: TL, MÁC, JPS, WS, and SZ contributed to the conceptual design of the 
study, as well as the writing and reviewing of the manuscript. AA contributed to reviewing the manuscript and designing 
the sample selection protocol.Conflicts of Interest: None declared.References1.Antes AL, Walsh HA, Strait M, 
Hudson-Vitale CR, DuBois JM. Examining data repository guidelines for qualitative data sharing. J Empir Res Hum Res 
Ethics. 2018 Feb;13(1):61–73. doi: 10.1177/1556264617744121. doi. Medline.2.Shelton RC, Philbin MM, Ramanadhan S. 
Qualitative research methods in chronic disease: introduction and opportunities to promote health equity. Annu Rev 
Public Health. 2022 Apr 5;43(37-57):37–57. doi: 10.1146/annurev-publhealth-012420-105104. doi. Medline.3.National 
Cancer Institute; 2018.  [21-07-2025]. Qualitative methods in implementation 
science.https://cancercontrol.cancer.gov/IS/docs/NCI-DCCPS-ImplementationScience-WhitePaper.pdf URL. Accessed.4.Castro 
FG, Kellison JG, Boyd SJ, Kopak A. A methodology for conducting integrative mixed methods research and data analyses. J 
Mix Methods Res. 2010 Sep 20;4(4):342–360. doi: 10.1177/1558689810382916. doi. Medline.5.Busetto L, Wick W, Gumbinger 
C. How to use and assess qualitative research methods. Neurol Res Pract. 2020;2(1):14.  doi: 
10.1186/s42466-020-00059-z. doi. Medline.6.Yardley L, Bradbury K, Morrison L.  Qualitative Research in Psychology: 
Expanding Perspectives in Methodology and Design. American Psychological Association; 2021. Using qualitative research 
for intervention development and evaluation; pp. 263–282. doi.7.Duggleby W, Williams A. Methodological and 
epistemological considerations in utilizing qualitative inquiry to develop interventions. Qual Health Res. 2016 
Jan;26(2):147–153. doi: 10.1177/1049732315590403. doi. Medline.8.Edin KJ, Fields CD, Grusky DB, et al.  Listening to 
the voices of America. RSF. 2024 Sep;10(4):1–31. doi: 10.7758/RSF.2024.10.4.01. doi.9.Fenner M, Crosas M, Grethe JS, et 
al.  A data citation roadmap for scholarly data repositories. Sci Data. 2019 Apr 10;6(1):28.  doi: 
10.1038/s41597-019-0031-8. doi. Medline.10.Nuzzo R. How scientists fool themselves—and how they can stop. Nature. 2015 
Oct 8;526(7572):182–185. doi: 10.1038/526182a. doi. Medline.11.McCormick J, Rodney P, Varcoe C. Reinterpretations 
across studies: an approach to meta-analysis. Qual Health Res. 2003 Sep;13(7):933–944. doi: 10.1177/1049732303253480. 
doi. Medline.12.Vogel JA, Rising KL, Jones J, Bowden ML, Ginde AA, Havranek EP. Reasons patients choose the emergency 
department over primary care: a qualitative metasynthesis. J Gen Intern Med. 2019 Nov;34(11):2610–2619. doi: 
10.1007/s11606-019-05128-x. doi. Medline.13.Wachinger J, Bärnighausen K, Schäfer LN, Scott K, McMahon SA. Prompts, 
pearls, imperfections: comparing ChatGPT and a human researcher in qualitative data analysis. Qual Health Res. 2025 
Aug;35(9):951–966. doi: 10.1177/10497323241244669. doi. Medline.14.Morgan DL. Exploring the use of artificial 
intelligence for qualitative data analysis: the case of ChatGPT. Int J Qual Methods. 2023 Oct;22:16094069231211248. 
doi: 10.1177/16094069231211248. doi.15.De Paoli S. Performing an inductive thematic analysis of semi-structured 
interviews with a large language model: an exploration and provocation on the limits of the approach. Soc Sci Comput 
Rev. 2024 Aug;42(4):997–1019. doi: 10.1177/08944393231220483. doi.16.Lewis P, Perez E, Piktus A, et al.  
Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive NLP tasks. NIPS’20: Proceedings of the 34th International 
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems; Dec 6-12, 2020; Vancouver, BC.  [20-03-2026].  Presented at. URL. 
Accessed.17.Zhang H, Wu C, Xie J, Lyu Y, Cai J, Carroll JM. Harnessing the power of AI in qualitative research: 
exploring, using and redesigning ChatGPT. Comput Hum Behav. 2025 May;4:100144. doi: 10.1016/j.chbah.2025.100144. 
doi.18.Robertson S, Zaragoza H. The probabilistic relevance framework: BM25 and beyond. Found Trends Inf Retr. 
2009;3(4):333–389. doi: 10.1561/1500000019. doi.19.Lin SC, Asai A, Li M, et al.  How to train your DRAGON: diverse 
augmentation towards generalizable dense retrieval. Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 
2023; Dec 6-10, 2023; Singapore.  Presented at. doi.20.Docker.  [07-04-2026]. https://www.docker.com/ URL. 
Accessed.21.Sharp EA, Munly K. Reopening a can of words: qualitative secondary data analysis. J Fam Theory Rev. 2022 
Mar;14(1):44–58. doi: 10.1111/jftr.12443. doi.22.Cook DA, Ginsburg S, Sawatsky AP, Kuper A, D’Angelo JD. Artificial 
intelligence to support qualitative data analysis: promises, approaches, pitfalls. Acad Med. 2025 Oct 
1;100(10):1134–1149. doi: 10.1097/ACM.0000000000006134. doi. Medline.23.Christou PA. Reliability and validity in 
qualitative research revisited and the role of AI. Qual Rep. 2025;30(3):3306–3314. doi: 10.46743/2160-3715/2025.7523. 
doi.24.Kabir SMA, Ali F, Ahmed RL, Sulaiman-Hill R. Exploring the use of AI in qualitative data analysis: comparing 
manual processing with Avidnote for theme generation. Int J Qual Methods. 2025 Apr;24:16094069251336810. doi: 
10.1177/16094069251336810. doi.25.Amer E, Elboghdadly T. The end of the search engine era and the rise of generative 
AI: a paradigm shift in information retrieval. 2024 International Mobile, Intelligent, and Ubiquitous Computing 
Conference (MIUCC); Nov 13-14, 2024; Cairo, Egypt.  [20-03-2026].  Presented at. URL. Accessed. doi.26.Mohammadi E, 
Thelwall M, Cai Y, Collier T, Tahamtan I, Eftekhar A. Is generative AI reshaping academic practices worldwide? A survey 
of adoption, benefits, and concerns. Inf Process Manag. 2026 Jan;63(1):104350. doi: 10.1016/j.ipm.2025.104350. 
doi.27.Tools such as ChatGPT threaten transparent science; here are our ground rules for their use. Nature New Biol. 
2023 Jan 26;613(7945):612.  doi: 10.1038/d41586-023-00191-1. doi. Medline.28.Jobin A, Ienca M, Vayena E. The global 
landscape of AI ethics guidelines. Nat Mach Intell. 2019;1(9):389–399. doi: 10.1038/s42256-019-0088-2. doi.
