Narrative-Integrated Thematic Analysis (NITA): AI-Supported Theme Generation

Without Coding

Kien Nguyen-Trung1 and Ngoc Lan Nguyen 2

1
    Corresponding author. Research Fellow, Water Sensitive Cities Australia,

Monash Sustainable Development Institute, Monash University, Clayton Campus, VIC 3800,

Australia. Kien.nguyen@monash.edu; ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1782-7405

2
    School of Trade and International Economics, National Economics University, Hanoi,

Vietnam. ngocnl@neu.edu.vn. ORCID: 0000-0003-2816-6726.

        Abstract. The coding approach has dominated qualitative data analysis (QDA)

        since at least the introduction of grounded theory in the 1960s. The development

        of generative AI (GenAI) has led to an emerging debate about whether GenAI

        can help qualitative researchers shift away from the coding paradigm. Yet, the

        application of GenAI in QDA to date has largely focused on replacing human

        coding to improve efficiency and effectiveness, while the attention to facilitating

        the transition to alternative methods remains limited. In this article, we introduce

        a Narrative-Integrated Thematic Analysis procedure (NITA) that allows

        qualitative researchers to design, train and guide a GenAI in conducting thematic

        analysis. This NITA approach is regarded as a thematic analysis approach that

        positions researchers’ reflexivity, intellect and judgement at the centre of the

        analysis process. This approach combines a reflexive, iterative monitoring,

        evaluation and learning procedure (PERFECT) with a conversational method for

        interacting with and guiding GenAI. Using an publicly available interview dataset

        provided by Lumivero and custom ChatGPT, we applied this approach through

        six stages: planning an initial PERFECT procedure, preparation, generating
                                                                                                 2
      candidate themes, constructing individual narratives, constructing meta-narrative,

      and writing up. Compared to our previous experiment on the same dataset using

      the coding approach, we have found that the themes generated this time had

      similar qualities. This reveal the transformative potential of GenAI to redefine

      thematic analysis.

      Keywords: ChatGPT, Coding, Categorizing, Generative AI, Qualitative Data

      Analysis, Thematic Analysis, Template Analysis, Reflexivity

1     Introduction

      “Any researcher who wishes to become proficient at doing qualitative analysis must

      learn to code well and easily. The excellence of the research rests in large part on the

      excellence of the coding” (Strauss, 1987, p.27).

Coding is a crucial method that refers to assigning a label that ‘symbolically assigns a

summative, salient, essence-capturing, and/or evocative attribute for a portion of language

based or visual data’ (Saldaña, 2016, p.4). Coding helps researchers deal with a vast amount

of data and condense them into a manageable scale from which researchers can construct

meaningful patterns (categories or themes) or theories (Miles & Huberman, 1994; Miles et

al., 2013).

        The statement above by Anselm Strauss, one of the creators of grounded theory,

indicates the importance of coding to qualitative data analysis (QDA). Since its first

publications, grounded theory has advocated for an extensive coding process which including

different coding methods such as open/ initial coding, axial coding, focused coding, and

theoretical coding. The popularity of grounded theory and its coding methods (Glaser &
                                                                                                  3
Strauss, 1967; Strauss & Corbin, 1991; Charmaz, 2006) has led students and newcomers in

qualitative research to mistakenly believe that coding is a must in QDA process. The coding

approach has dominated the field of QDA since 1980s with many data analysis approaches

incorporating coding as a core component immediately after familiarizing with the data. For

instance, Interpretative Phenomenological Analysis (Smith, 2009) has conceptual coding as

part of initial noting (Step 2) that assists researchers in interacting with data at a conceptual or

more interpretative level. Template Analysis (King et al., 2018) has preliminary coding (Step

2), which centers on techniques such as hierarchical and parallel coding to structure data into

initial templates. Framework Analysis (Gale et al., 2013) also consider coding (descriptive or

conceptual) (Step 3) as a foundation to form an analytical or thematic framework (Step 4).

Similarly, sematic and latent coding (Stage ) are crucial in helping generate candidate themes

(Stage 3) in Reflexive Thematic Analysis process (Braun & Clarke, 2022).

       Despite its popularity, “coding is just one way of analyzing qualitative data, not the

way” (Saldaña, 2013, p.2, original italics by Saldaña). In their theorizing of QDA, Maxwell

and Chmiel (2014) consider the foundation of coding paradigm, namely, similarity-based

relations, as just one strategy of QDA alongside contiguity. While the similarity-based

strategy aims to capture “resemblances or common features; their identification is based on

comparison, which can be independent of time and place”, the contiguity-based strategy

focuses on “juxtaposition in time and space, the influence of one thing on another, or

relations among parts of a text; their identification involves seeing actual connections

between things, rather than similarities and differences” (Maxwell & Chmiel, 2014, p. 22).

Representing the former, coding alongside thematic generation seeks to facilitate the

condensation and abstraction process that produces codes, metacodes or categories, themes,
                                                                                                   4
and at the highest level, theories, while narrative or case analyses seek to maintain the actual

connections and contextual information provided by participants (Saldaña, 2016; Miles et al.,

2013, Maxwell & Chmiel, 2014). Similarly, Freeman (2016), conceptualizes coding as part of

a categorizing thinking mode alongside four other modes of thinking in qualitative data

analysis including narrative thinking, dialectical thinking, poetical thinking, diagrammatical

thinking. Apart from coding, researchers can use story construction, creating an aesthetic

space to engage with data, exploration of contradictions and negotiations, or working with

moving assemblages (or diagrams).

       Thematic analysis (TA) refers to a family of methods, rather than a single, unified

method (Terry et al., 2017). Braun and Clarke (2022) classifies TA in three main groups,

running on a continuum from small q to Big Q poles (see Kidder & Fine (1987) for the

original classification of small q/Big Q): coding reliability TA (Boyatzis, 1998; Fereday &

Muir-Cochrane, 2006; Guest, MacQueen, & Namey, 2012), codebook TA including multiple

forms of in-between small q and Big Q such as Template Analysis (King et al.,, 2018; Brooks

& King, 2014), Matrix analysis (Miles & Huberman, 1994, Miles et al., 2013), Two-Cycle

analysis (Saldaña 2013, 2016); Framework (Method) Analysis (Ritchie & Spencer, 1994;

Gale et al. 2013), and the Reflexive Thematic Analysis (RTA) by Braun and Clarke (2006,

2022). Coding reliability TA is underlined by (post)positivism, RTA by constructivism,

critical realism and relativism, codebook TA by realism, critical realism, constructionism,

and pragmatism (Braun & Clarke, 2022; Ritchie & Spencer, 1994; King et al., 2018). While

these approaches are different in their underlining espitemological and methodological

assumptions, they all place coding at the foundation of their analysis processes.
                                                                                                  5
       Qualitative researchers have long used technologies, particularly, Computer-Assisted

Qualitative Data Analysis Software (CAQDAS) in assisting their coding since 1980s

(Nguyen-Trung, 2024a). Current CAQDAS, notably DiscoverText, QDA Miner, and

Leximancer, have taken the advantage of the technological advancements of Artificial

Intelligence (AI) such as Machine Learning (ML) in the last two decades to significantly

assist human researchers in coding and classification of text data (Paulus, 2023; Shulman

2011; Silver 2019). Yet, the emergence of generative AI (GenAI) technology, particularly

ChatGPT in late 2022, seems presenting a new turning point. There has been an upsurge in

the application of GenAI in various qualitative analysis approaches. Thematic Analysis has

received the most applications, particularly RTA (Morgan, 2023; Hitch, 2023; Hamilton et

al., 2023, Drápal et al., 2023; De Paoli 2023, 2024; Prescott et al., 2024), and Template

Analysis (Nguyen-Trung, 2024a). Additionally, there has been trials in other different

approaches such as context analysis (Chew et al., 2023), grounded theory (Sinha et al., 2024;

Wachinger et al., 2024). Despite differences, most of these applications more or less involved

with transforming coding (i.e., assigning labels to data segments) in order to seek patterns in

data (themes or categories). Different being the application that seeks to employ different

discouse analysis techniques such as topic segmentation and diaglogue discourse parsing

(Fan et al., 2023), concordance analysis and function-to-form analysis (Curry, Baker, and

Brookes, 2024).

       Different from them, Morgan (2025) advocates for a non-coding method labelled

‘query-based approach’ (QBA). QBA focuses on asking GenAI to search for themes without

coding. It includes three steps: Step 1: asking broad, unstructured queries; Step 2: following

up with more specific queries, and Step 3: examining the supporting data (Morgan, 2025). In
                                                                                                    6
comparing with other TA approaches, Morgan’s approach concentrates on theme

development and refinement (Steps 4 and 5 in Reflexive Thematic Analysis (RTA) by Braun

and Clarke 2022), applying analytical framework in Framework Analysis (Gale et al. 2013),

or modifying and defining template in Template Analysis (King et al., 2018) (see Fig. 5 for

more information). In his paper, Hayes advocates for a similar approach that considers large

language models (LLMs) as a ‘conversational partner’ through whom researchers can

converse with qualitative data to identify “recurring patterns, subtle shifts in tone, or suggest

new interpretive angles” including visualised images or diagrams (Hayes, 2025, p. 1).

Reflecting on these recent developments, Friese (2025) suggests that with new AI

technologies, qualitative research is having an opportunity about to take a revolutionary shift

that can transform the way qualitative data is analyzed.

       In this paper, we aim to innovate TA by advocating for the non-coding approach as

pioneered by Morgan, Hayes and Friese. We aim to answer the key esearch question: Can

ChatGPT/GenAI help generate themes without coding? The second question is to follow up

with our previous work (Nguyen-Trung, 2024a) in which we used a coding-based methods -

the Guided AI Thematic Analysis (GAITA) approach – to code with AI and generate themes

using the dataset from the study "Environmental Change in Down East" (Lumivero, 2020;

Campbell and Meletis 2011). In the current study, we want to see if our new non-coding

approach, NITA, can generate similar themes as produced by the GAITA approach.

      In the sections that follow, we start with describing our dataset and methodological

approach. In Section 3, together with the analysis activities and results within each stage we

also discuss these results with the existing TA approaches.
                                                                                               7
2     Narrative-Integrated Thematic Analysis (NITA) Approach

2.1   Context and dataset

In our previous work (Nguyen-Trung, 2024a), we presented an adapted version of Template

Analysis (King et al., 2018) called Guided AI Thematic Analysis (GAITA). GAITA,

developed based on pragmatism and the human in the loop approach, was used to guide GPT-

4 in four stages of template analysis: data familiarization, preliminary coding, template

formation and finalization, and theme development. In this experiment, we used the sample

public project "Environmental Change in Down East" provided by Lumivero (2020). This

sample project includes 11 short interviews conducted in 2008-2009 by scholars from Duke

University's Nicholas School of the Environment at their Marine Lab in Beaufort, N.C, which

aimed to examine how communities in the Down East region of Carteret County, North

Carolina, USA, perceived the change in their environment (Campbell and Meletis 2011).

Each interview transcript is about 6 pages long or about 2,000 words. Each transcript is

structured by topics or headings including Q.1. Connection to Down East; Q.2. Connection to

Down East natural environment; Q.3. Professional perspective on Down East; Q.4.

Community and Environmental Change; Q.5. Vision for the future of Down East; and Q.6.

Barriers to and opportunities for achieving your vision.

      In the current study, to faciliate the comparision with our previous work (Nguyen-

Trung, 2024a), we maintain the same research question "How do these people connect to

Down East?" and utilise the same dataset. While our previous work (Nguyen-Trung, 2024a)

employed GPT-4 to proceed Section Q1 from 11 interviews that made up a total of 6,306

words, in the current study, we include all 11 interviews (20,832 words) into our experiment
                                                                                                8
with GPT-4o. In addition, in the current experiment, we used custom GPT – a feature in

ChatGPT that allows users to create and fine-tune their AI chatbots.

2.2   NITA - an approach to non-coding with GenAI

We develop Narrative-Integrated Thematic Analysis (NITA) as one method to facilitate non-

coding approach to thematic analysis. This approach is considered as part of the thematic

analysis (TA) family, but is specifically designed to engage with GenAI in generating themes

without coding. Our NITA approach runs through six circular, iterative stages as seen in Fig

1.

      • Stage 1 - Planning the initial perfect procedure: Purposefully plan the initial

      PERFECT (developing purpose, envisioning stages/steps to meet purposes, realizing

      GenAI-generated outputs, formulating prompts, experimenting with GenAI, checking

      results, and tuning/adapting) procedure to guide GenAI-supported qualitative analysis,

      linking research questions with AI tasks and expected outputs.

      • Stage 2 - Preparing data and the AI system: Familiarize with the data, prepare the

      dataset, and choose GenAI tool and configure a customized GenAI system, including

      training the AI model to support thematic analysis effectively.

      • Stage 3 - Generating candidate themes: Generate lists of candidate themes, discuss,

      and use one unified list for guiding analysis.

      • Stage 4 - Constructing individual narratives: Apply the candidate themes to interpret

      and construct personal stories for each participant, maintaining real-world relationships

      (contiguity) and continuously refining themes through reflexive iteration.
                                                                                              9
      • Stage 5 - Constructing meta narratives: Apply the refined themes construct patterns

      across groups (e.g., age, gender) to form meta-narratives, highlighting both shared

      experiences and divergent perspectives.

      • Stage 6 - Writing up: Synthesize the constructed narratives, integrating thematic

      insights to address the research questions through coherent, reflexive reporting.




Fig. 1. Narrative-Integrated Thematic Analysis process

This process is not linear but pragmatic, reflexive and iterative. Pragmatic because our

approach was guided by pragmatism that uses abductive reasoning that “moves back and

forth between induction and deduction" (Morgan 2007 p.71) as well as prioritizing searching
                                                                                                  10
for best explanations or thematic patterns to answer the research question “How does these

people connect to Down East?”. We consider researchers’ reflexivity at the central of the

circle, which helps maintain human in the loop in providing inputs before working with

GenAI, then monitoring, critically reflecting and fine-tuning GenAI-generated outputs, as

well as documenting lessons learnt after each stage. PERFECT framework is an iterative

procedure to help reflexively maintain ongoing monitoring, evaluation throughout the

analysis process. Keep human in the loop avoids the ‘blackbox’ analysis and the dominance

of technologies (Morgan, 2025; Woods & Wickham, 2006). The process of six stages is not

prescriptive and linear, but rather, remains iterative and adaptive to the research needs.

In the next section, we will present the details of our analysis process and its results before

discussing our approach against other TA approaches.

3     Applying NITA to thematic analysis

Stage 1. Planning the Initial PERFECT Procedure

PERFECT is a reflexive procedure to purposefully guide researchers in monitoring,

evaluation, learning and working with GenAI for the purpose of qualitative data analysis.

PERFECT emphasizes researchers’ reflexivity through out process of interacting with

GenAI.

         The PERFECT procedure serves as a reflexive and iterative guide for using GenAI in

qualitative research. It is purposefully designed to link research questions with AI tasks and

expected outputs while ensuring adaptability throughout the research process. This strage

establishes a procedure for working with AI, including specifying objectives, steps, expected

outputs, and prompts.
                                                                                     11
       The PERFECT procedure (see Fig.3) consists of the following seven key components,

of which, Purpose, Envision and Realize are the researchers’ space where we provide our

inputs through research questions, needs, expected outputs; Formulate and Experiment is the

human-AI collaboration space, in which researchers design prompts and actively converse

with AI through many queries to explore the data; Check and Tune come back to the

researchers’ space where they critically reflect on AI-generated ouputs and adapt their

prompts, or even their research questions to address new information.




         Fig. 3. PERFECT procedure for planning our work with GenAI

In this project, we (KNT and NLN) co-developed the initial PERFECT procedure in Google

Sheets. The purpose of this stage is to develop a procedure that guided us in working with

ChatGPT to generate themes without coding. The speadsheet also acted as our reflexive space
                                                                                              12
where we monitor, adapt, and record any inputs, outputs or reflections throughout the

analysis process (see Table 1). This space helped maintain the alertness of our consciousness

when assessing AI-generated outcomes.

Table 1. PERFECT template for monitoring, evaluation and learning

 Components       Subcomponents            Recording                     Space
 Purpose          -Objectives              Objective 1                   Researchers' space
                                           Objective 2
                                           Objective n
 Envision         - Stages                 Step 1 – Step n:
 Realize          - Expected outputs       Output 1 – Output n
 Formulate        - Prompt design          Prompt 1 - Prompt n           Researcher-AI
                  - Components in a                                      collaboration
                  prompt
 Experiment       - Experiment             Trial 1 – Trial n
                  - Recording result
                  - AI model information
                  - Date
 Check            - Reflection             Check 1 – Check n             Researchers' space
                  - Interpretation
                  - Validation
 Tune             - Refinement             Adapt 1 – Adapt n
                  - Adjustment
                  - Reasons why
Source: Authors

In Stage 1, the PERFECT framework is for brainstorming so that it should be provisional

rather than being fixed. In our experiment, we focused on brainstorming three components:

Purpose (objectives), Envision (stages or steps), and Realize (AI-expected output). Our initial

PERFECT procedure (Table 2) presents what we imagined rather than based on testing with

ChatGPT. As such, compared to the full NITA procedure resulted from the six stages of

experimenting (Appendix 1), the initial PERFECT procedure only contained three stages,
                                                                                            13
without Stage 5 and detailed activities. After Stage 1, the initial PERFECT procedure was

continuously revised and finalized throughout the remaining five stages. This process ensures

continuous improvement and refinement throughout TA.

Table 2. Example of an initial PERFECT procedure

Purpose (objectives)             Envision (Stage)                   Realize (expected
                                                                    output)
Generate initial thematic        Stage 1. Generate themes with AI List of themes with
framework                                                           descriptions and
                                                                    quotations
Using thematic framework to      Stage 2. Develop interpretation by Story written for
interpret data to see if this    applying the initial thematic      Transcript 1-n
framework works                  framework through
Readjust thematic framework      Stage 3. Writing a whole story use A whole story
                                 the finalized thematic framework responding to the
                                                                    research question

Source: Authors

Stage 2. Preparation

Stage 2.1 Familiarizing with the dataset

At this stage, both researchers engaged in the process of becoming thoroughly acquainted

with the dataset. While the first author (KNT) had previously analyzed the dataset (Nguyen-

Trung, 2024a), the second author (NLN) was new to the dataset. As such, she undertook an

independent reading and re-reading of the data, systematically recording her initial

impressions to develop her own understanding. This process of familiarization was critical in

fostering an independent and reflexive engagement with the data. By immersing ourselves in

the dataset, we were able to develop our own analytical perspective, which enabled us to

critically evaluate ChatGPT’s performance and outputs. This approach ensured that the AI-
                                                                                                 14
assisted TA was guided by our judgment, preventing undue reliance on the model in the

generation of themes.

Stage 2.2 Preparing the dataset

The dataset comprises 11 interviews from the “Environmental Change in Down East” project,

conducted in Carteret County, North Carolina, USA (Lumivero, 2020). These interviews

examine community perceptions of environmental changes in the region. Each transcript is

approximately 2,000 words in length, resulting in a total dataset of 20,420 words across all

interviews. To minimize the influence of pre-existing structures on theme development, we

systematically cleaned the transcripts by removing headings and formatting inconsistencies.

We then turned the transcripts into pdf format.

Stage 2.3. Preparing the AI system

We needed to select relevant GenAI tool(s) to meet our research. Making this decision

depending on our needs, GenAI’s technological capability, our comfortability with the

features they offer, their subcription fees. For instance, at the time of our experiment, both

Anthropic’s Claude Sonnet 3.5 and OpenAI’s GPT-4o offered the capability to operate a

group of documents: Claude has ‘Project’, whereas, ChatGPT has Custom GPT. They both

had similar levels of context window (128,000 tokens, or 96,000 words) (OpenAI, 2024). We

chose ChatGPT since it could be shared among our research team.

       The preparation for the AI system included turning off data for training, setting up in

ChatGPT system involving the use of ROLE and GUIDES. The second step can be done by

clicking on your profile at the top right corner and choose “Customize ChatGPT”. In the

windows appearing, we can customize ChatGPT to force it adhere to our requirements. The
                                                                                           15
ROLE framework focuses on introducing us to ChatGPT or answering the question

“Anything else ChatGPT should know about you”: Role (R), Objectives (O), Lexicon (L),

and Ethics (E) (Appendix 2). We used the GUIDES framework to provide ChatGPT with our

requirements over the traits this AI chatbot should have when responding to our prompts.

This framework includes Guidelines (G), Understanding (U), Integrity (I), Document

Referencing (D), Expression (E), and Suggestions (S). We used the ROLE framework to

answer the question “What traits should ChatGPT have?” (Appendix 3).




                        Fig. 2. Customizing in ChatGPT’s system
       In addition to the general set-up, we used ChatGPT’s feature “My GPTs” to create a

customized GPT model named Narrative-Integrated Thematic Analysis (NITA) (Nguyen-

Trung, 2024b).
                                                                                               16




Fig 3. Customizing GPT in accordance with Narrative-Integrated Thematic Analysis
       This GPT was developed KNT (Nguyen-Trung, 2024b) and then shared with NLN for

testing and experimenting with NITA. In the “Configure” (see Fig. 3), we defined key aspects

of this GPT including name, general description, guidelines on key behaviors (e.g., it must

adhere to the highest standards in academic research, qualitative research, and ethical guide-

lines), and uploaded datasets (including pdf files of 11 transcripts). In the description we

included the guidelines as seen in Box 1:
                                                                                                 17
 Box 1: Guidelines for Custom GPT

This GPT is a Qualitative Expert, designed to help users analyze qualitative data, identify

patterns, and generate insights. It should behave as an expert in qualitative research,

providing detailed and thoughtful responses. It will assist with developing themes and

interpreting results directly from raw data, omitting the step of coding.

The GPT must adhere to the highest standards in academic research, qualitative research,

and ethical guidelines. Do not fabricate data or generate findings not explicitly derived from

the materials we provide.

Responses should be professional, insightful, and align with best practices in qualitative

research. It will help users identify themes as shared patterns of meaning among participants

relative to the research questions posed. Users can upload their datasets for analysis.

Through the narrative-integrated thematic analysis (NITA) approach, it will engage in back-

and-forth conversations to collaboratively generate, revise and finalise themes.

  The NITA approach has the following stages: [Paste NITA stages]




Stage 3. Generating Candidate Themes

Stage 3.1. Generate candidate themes with AI using the same prompt on at least 3 different

occasions

We generated candidate themes through AI-assisted TA by executing the same prompt

multiple times. Specifically, the prompt, which directed ChatGPT to identify themes based on

the dataset in relation to the research question, was run at least three times. This iterative
                                                                                          18
process ensured consistency and reproducibility in AI-generated themes, allowing for a more

robust and reliable thematic framework.

      Prompt 3.1: Based on these uploaded interviews, can you generate themes in response

      to the research question: “How do these people connect to Down East?” # Theme is

      defined as the patterns of shared meaning across the dataset (e.g., many interviewees),

      relevant to the research question. ## The final output will be a table with the following

      columns: Column 1: Theme, Column 2: Description of Theme Meaning, Column 3:

      Quotation from Transcripts. Please make sure you quote the names of the interviewees

      for each quote.

      This approach follows the pattern-based definition of themes from Braun & Clarke

(2022) while ensuring a more structured AI output. However, as we tested the same prompt

with King et al.’s (2018) definition of theme as “Theme is defined as the recurrent and

distinctive features of participants’ accounts that characterize perceptions and/or

experiences”, GPT-4o-generated list of themes appeared the same (Table 3). As seen in this

table, we observed ChatGPT-generated themes were predominantly formulated as topic-

based nouns or domain summary, such as "Community Cohesion and Support", which, while

useful for categorization, often lacks the meaningful patterns captured across the dataset

(Saldaña, 2016; Braun & Clarke, 2022). Nonetheless, GPT-4o’s description of the theme

meaning and quotations allowed us to identify the patterns of meanings under each of the

topic-based names. This was important for reviewing and revising themes later.
                                                                                             19
Table 3: List of themes from the first occasion


Theme                    Description of Theme Meaning           Quotation from Transcripts


1. Sense of Belonging    Many participants feel a deep-rooted   "Thirteen generations that

and Legacy               connection to Down East, often tied to we know that they were in

                         generational heritage and inherited    North Carolina in Carteret

                         land.                                  County." (James)


2. Community             Participants emphasize the strong      "If somebody’s boat breaks

Cohesion and Support     sense of community, mutual support,    down, everybody comes to

                         and collaboration among residents.     help." (Charles)


3. Natural Beauty and    The pristine and serene environment,   "You can go along the

Environment              including waterways, marshes, and      shore and pick up oysters or

                         beaches, is a significant draw.        clams." (Richard)


4. Cultural Traditions   Unique accents, storytelling, and      "I find the language so

and Heritage             traditions like fishing embody a       colorful, the cadence and

                         distinct cultural identity.            the phrases." (Barbara)


5. Challenges of         Concerns about modern development, "Harkers Island has

Change and               its impact on water quality, and the   changed...They don’t feel

Development              loss of traditional ways of life.      like they’ve left Harkers
                                                                                                 20
                                                                    Island, Harkers Island has

                                                                    left them." (Susan)


6. Connection to the      The water plays a central role in         "I love to flounder gig.

Water                     livelihood, leisure, and identity, with   That’s probably my biggest

                          fishing being a major activity.           passion." (Thomas)


7. Economic Shifts        Decline of traditional industries like    "The biggest change is the

                          commercial fishing and reliance on        sense that commercial

                          tourism and other modern industries.      fishing as a livelihood is

                                                                    dying." (Barbara)


8. Resistance to          A desire to preserve local culture and "We don’t like change, we

Outsider Influence        values, with caution towards changes want it like it is." (Patricia)

                          brought by new residents or tourism.


  Source: Authors

In addition, we also observed that the use of short quotations appeared insufficient in

conveying the contextual insights from each participant. To address this limitation, we asked

ChatGPT to expand original quotations to enhance the richness and nuance of the theme. In

Table 4, ChatGPT was able to expand quotations that allowed us to make better judgements

of the themes’ meaning.

        Prompt 3.1.1: Below is the result of theme generation based on the dataset Down

        East. The quotes appeared short so that contextual information was ignored. Can you
                                                                                           21
        please scan the dataset and extend the quotes from the relevant interviewees to make

        them more meaningful? ##The final output is the table with extended quotes. ###Here

        is the table: [Paste Table above]

                 Table 4: Excerpt of the first two themes in the revised list


Theme               Theme Meaning              Extended Quotation from Transcripts


1. Sense of         Many participants feel a "My family has been a short time in

Belonging and       deep-rooted connection     comparison to hers. Hers was here 13

Legacy              to Down East, often tied generations. Didn't we figure it up, including

                    to generational heritage   our great grandchildren? Thirteen generations

                    and inherited land.        that we know that they were in North Carolina

                                               in Carteret County. Some of her family were

                                               from Harkers Island, or Davis Island, and on

                                               the Banks. It's family, this whole corner is

                                               family, and still is!" (James)


2. Community        Participants emphasize     "One of the beautiful things about living down

Cohesion and        the strong sense of        here is how supportive everybody is of one

Support             community, mutual          another. You know, somebody’s boat breaks

                    support, and               down, everybody comes to help. Somebody’s

                    collaboration among        boat sinks; everybody drops what they’re

                    residents.                 doing to come help. Somebody’s sick and can’t

                                               get out, these guys drop by fish every day.
                                                                                                  22
                                                Most of the time they’ll clean it. Take it; all

                                                you gotta do is cook it." (Charles)


Source: Authors

Stage 3.2 Compare the Lists of Themes from Three Occasions

After generating themes across three different AI interactions, we discussed and compared

the similarities and differences across the three lists (Table 5). Despite the difference in

theme orders, ChatGPT-generated theme lists appeared similar. Only Occasion 1 resulted in

eight themes while both Occasions 2 and 3 had six themes. We agreed that in Occasion 1,

themes 5 (Challenges of change and development) and 8 (resistance to outsider influence)

can be grouped under the theme “resistence to change and development” that appeared in

both Occasions 2 and 3. Meanwhile, theme 6 (Connection to the water) and theme 7

(Economic shifts) can be grouped under the theme “Fishing and Water-Dependent Work”.



                  Table 5. Comparing Theme lists from three occasations


Occasion 1                      Occasion 2                  Occasion 3


1. Sense of Belonging and       1. Generational Roots       1. Heritage and Family Roots

Legacy


2. Community Cohesion and 2. Natural Environment            2. Natural Beauty and Environment

Support
                                                                                           23
3. Natural Beauty and          3. Community Cohesion 3. Fishing and Water-Dependent

Environment                                              Work


4. Cultural Traditions and     4. Resistance to Change 4. Community and Connectedness

Heritage


5. Challenges of Change and 5. Cultural Traditions       5. Resisting Change and

Development                                              Development


6. Connection to the Water     6. Economic               6. Cultural Distinction and

                               Dependence on Nature      Language


7. Economic Shifts             N/A                       N/A


8. Resistance to Outsider      N/A                        N/A

Influence


Source: Authors

Stage 3.3 Discuss and Agree on an Initial Thematic Framework

Following the comparative analysis, we discussed and agreed on an initial thematic

framework (i.e., a list of candiate themes) that consisted of six themes. A theme’s name

should ‘signal its meaning and analytic direction’ (Braun & Clarke, 2022, p.112). The names

of initial themes appeared mostly as a topic summary. To change this, we can revise the

names based on the participants’ quotations or close phrases they use. Following this we

asked ChatGPT to suggest themes’ names.
                                                                                               24
       Prompt 3.2: Now, try to scan your Down East database and come up with themes

       name based on meaningful quotes from participants. The final output is a table with

       these columns: original theme names, suggestion 1, suggestion 2, suggestion 3. When

       you use exact quotes for themes name, please put them into single quotation mark for

       cross-check.

       We run Prompt 3.2 on two occasions and then discussed these suggestions to agree on

the initial thematic framework. Table 6 shows alternative names we agreed based on

ChatGPT’s suggestion and compares them with the list of names based on our previous work

that utilised a coding approach (Nguyen-Trung, 2024a). The list of alternative themes

provided us with a more nuenced meaning, offering us a chance to revise the themes’ names

later. Instead of deciding the names of themes at this stage, we kept both lists of themes

names together until Stage 5.

       The comparison with Nguyen-Trung’s (2024) theme list reveals a high degree of

similarities in patterns identified between two analytic approaches. Except for theme 6 that

refers to the resistance to change and development that was not included in Nguyen-Trung’s

list (2024), the remaining five themes appear similar, suggesting that ChatGPT is capable of

generating meaningful themes without the need for coding. Notably, the only new theme that

emerged in our current approach highlights the potential for AI-generated analysis to surface

additional insights.
                                                                                           25
Table 6. Comparing the revised themes’ names with Nguyen-Trung’s (2024)


Nguyen-Trung & Nguyen (2025)                                Themes by Nguyen-Trung

                                                            (2024)
Topic-based themes        Patterns-based themes


1. Generational and       1. Ties that run deeper than      1. Connection through

family roots              the land                          Generational and Historical

                                                            Continuity


2. Cultural distinction   2. ‘We have our own sort of       2. Connection through

and language              language and values systems’ Cultural Identity and Local

                                                            Pride


3. Community and          3. A community woven              3. Connection through Active

connectedness             together                          Community Engagement


4. Natural beauty and     4. 'The beauty is in the trees'   4. Connection through

environment                                                 Natural Appreciation and

                                                            Advocacy [for Natural

                                                            Beauty and Environmental

                                                            Sustainability]


5. Fishing and water-     5. ‘Tides that shape our lives’ 5. Connection through Local

dependent work                                              Livelihood and Lifestyle
                                                                                              26
6. Resisting change and 6. 'We don’t like change'
                                                          N/A
development

Source: Authors



Stage 4. Constructing Individual Narratives

Stage 4.1 Construct an Individual Narrative for Each Transcript

In this stage, we applied the initial thematic framework developed in Stage 3 to construct an

individual narrative for each participant. The objective here was to deeper understand each

individual case.

      Prompt 4.1.1: Apply the thematic framework to construct a narrative for Barbara. The

      story must represent major themes from the thematic framework. The final output

      should be a table with the following columns: Column 1: Themes, Column 2: Barbara's

      story in relation to each theme with quotes for illustration. If any theme lacks

      supporting evidence in Barbara's case, it should be highlighted in the table.

      Reading and cross-checking ChatGPT’s narratives in according to the thematic

framework, we were able to better understanding Barbara’s case. For instance, regarding

Barbara’s connection to community, ChatGPT’s first response saying: “There is limited

evidence of active community engagement in Barbara’s narrative. While she values the

community and intended to raise children there for its strong sense of belonging, there are no

specific examples of participation in local activities or advocacy (Limited Evidence)”. While

this observation correctly identified key elements of Barbara’s experience, it initially

overlooked her reference to the "strong community that [she] enjoyed growing up." Yet, for
                                                                                                   27
us, this detail was essential in capturing Barbara’s lived experience of childhood in Down

East. This experience highlight the importance of continuous cross-check and re-reading the

original transcripts to ensure that the researchers’ thoughful judgements of GenAI-generated

outputs.

       In repeating Prompt 4.1.1, we compiled a matrix of thematic narratives for each

participants. This matrix allowed not only reading deeper into each participant’s story but

also understand better the themes’ meanings. For instance, regarding the connection to Down

East via local livelihoods (theme 5), for Dorothy, it was due to her partents and her husband’s

practice of fishing that deeply tied her to sea-based livelihoods and the importance of natural

resources (water). She remarked: “My mother and father made their living, more or less,

working with people that worked on the water. My husband—my first husband—and his

father worked on the water. My husband was a longshoreman. So, water has been a big part

of my life." But for Margaret, the connection was based more on her personal experience in

fishing. She noted: "I was fishing mostly for shrimp but also for fin fish, gill net fish, and I

have clammed – mechanical harvest of clams."

Stage 4.2 Identify Missing Themes in Individual Narratives

In this activity, we asked ChatGPT to revisit each participant’s story and identify new themes

that were not captured.

       Prompt 4.1.2: Based on Barbara’s narrative, identify any themes that are not captured

       in the thematic framework. If new themes emerge, provide quotations and details

       from the transcript as supporting evidence.
                                                                                                28
      Repeating Prompt 4.1.2, ChatGPT produced a list of new themes with at least 4 new

themes per participants (except for three interviews with Richard and Patricia, Roberts, and

Susan that have fix new themes). Reviewing these emerging themes, we found out that

indeed they captured nuences that were related to the original six themes above. For instance,

ChatGPT identified ‘Navigating Insider-Outsider Identity’ as a potential emerging theme

from Barbara, highlighting her reflections on her position within the community as she did

not consider herself “a local”. While this suggested theme provides valuable insight into the

complexities of Barbara’s connection, we thought that it aligned closely with the existing

theme of ‘Community and Connectedness’. As a result, we decided to make it a subtheme.

      Similarly, ChatGPT made some good observations that allowed us to further developed

the theme ‘Resistence to change and development’. For instance, it captured Charles’ opinion

as a real estate agent allowed him to not outrightly reject the development in Down East

because for him sooner or later local communities must deal with the development. Instead,

Charles advocated for smarter, more sustainable planning. In the case of Richards and

Patricia, they did not oppose development. Instead, they advocated for regulating the

development to avoid the rich took property and dimished the local ‘commercial fishermen's

way of life’. Patricia said: ‘I am all for development. I do think it should be regulated, so that

we can preserve as much of our heritage as we can’. Based on these new insights, we

believed that the names of the theme should be changed to ‘We don’t like unsustainable

change’.
                                                                                                29
Stage 5. Constructing Meta Narratives

Stage 5.1. Constructing Cross-Case Comparison

In this stage, the analysis transitioned from individual cases to a comparative examination of

cross-case connections to Down East. Rather than a ‘bounded system’ (Yin, 2014), a case

here is defined losely as actual or theoretical groups of participants based on certain

characteristics such as gender, age, residency or occupation. For the scope of this paper, we

focused on examining patterns of meanings across different gender groups. In practice,

however, researchers can apply our NITA approach to different groups that are meaningful

and relevant to their research questions. Prompt 5.1.1 used Braun and Clarke’s (2022, p.312)

definition of subthemes to guide ChatGPT.

       Prompt 5.1.1: Use the thematic framework to compare how each theme is made

       sense of in each gender group (females vs males). Within each theme, try to discuss

       subthemes of similarities and/or subthemes of differences with supporting quotations.

       A subtheme is a part of the main theme, capturing and highlighting an important

       facet (or facets) of the main theme. The final output is a table with the following

       columns: 1) Themes, 2) Similarities; 3) Differences. Provide me with a copiable table

       format.

       The result showed that while ChatGPT could show subthemes in both similarities and

differences, we needed to check if these subthemes make sense. In general, in most themes,

the differences identified by ChatGPT were not remarkable. For those we found reasonable,

we could ask ChatGPt to provide us with more quotations to confirm the observation or

explore further the differences that we found most relevant. For instance, in theme 5
                                                                                                  30
‘Livelihoods shaped by the sea’, ChatGPT found that ‘Women Advocate for Fishing

Industry, Men Reflect on its Decline’ We asked it to provide more data to support its claim.

Table 7 illustrated its responses, which helped us make sense of the differences between men

and women regarding theme 5.

                Table 7. Exceprt of ChatGPT response for Prompt 5.1.1

Theme           Similarities                          Differences


Livelihoods     Both genders recognize the sea as Women Advocate for Fishing Industry,

Shaped by the central to life and economy:            Men Reflect on its Decline:

Sea             Margaret (F): “I was fishing          Margaret (F): “I love the fishing business

                mostly for shrimp but also for fin actually, and I continue to advocate for

                fish, gill net fish, and I have       the fishing business now.”

                clammed – mechanical harvest of Susan (F): “Fishermen are bringing food

                clams.”                               to the table for everyone. It’s a public

                Richard (M): “I built that boat, I    trust resource.”

                built that forty-foot one in ’84. I   Men highlight declining profitability and

                was crab potting before that a        the struggle to continue fishing:

                little bit.”                          James (M): “With the failing seafood

                                                      industry in this area, I think tourism is

                                                      our only hope.”

                                                      Robert (M): “Our average number of fish
                                                                                               31
                                                    per trip is 10 percent of what it was 30

                                                    years ago.”




Source: Authors



Stage 5.2 Discuss on Naming Themes

As discussed above, we saved the task of finalising the names of themes to this late stage to

avoid jumping too quick into conclusion as recommended by Braun and Clarke (2022; see

also Terry et al., 2017). Yet, throughout the process of generating candidate themes (Stage 3),

exploring individual narratives (Stage 4) and comparing across cases (Stage 5), we were able

to come up with a few options to name the final themes. Table 8 presents three options

compiled from the previous analytic process. List 1 appears more formal and resemales the

way we approached to name themes in our previous work (Nguyen-Trung, 2024a). This way

of naming themes makes clear the central organizing concept (Braun & Clarke, 2022), that is

connection to Down East. List B appears more informal because it relies more on the

language of participants. List B provides more nuences to the themes’ meaning while List A

offers more abstraction. After discussion, we agreed to choose something in between (List C),

that combines both in vivo phrases and our abstraction.
                                                                                              32
                Table 8. Comparison between three lists of themes’ names

List A (more formal)                       List B (more informal)     List C (in-between)

1. [Connection through] Generational       1. Ties that run deeper    Family ties that bind

and Historical Continuity                  than the land

2. [Connection through] Cultural           2. ‘We have our own sort Pride in our people,

Identity and Local Pride                   of language and values     language, and traditions

                                           systems’

3. [Connection through] Active             3. A community woven       A community woven

Community Engagement                       together                   together

4. [Connection through] Natural            4. 'The beauty is in the   Where nature speaks of

Appreciation and Advocacy for Natural trees'                          belonging

Beauty and Environment

5. [Connection through] Water-             5. ‘Tides that shape our   Livelihoods shaped by

Dependent Livelihoods and Identity         lives’                     the sea

6. [Connection motivating] Resistance      6. 'We don’t like change' ‘We don’t like

to Change and Development:                                            [unsustainable] change’

Source: Authors

Stage 5.3 Create a Meta-Narrative

In the final stage, we synthesized the themes and individual cases to create a meta-narrative,

an overarching story that integrates individual experiences, action patterns, and socio-cultural

connections beyond the specific time-space constraints of any single participant. In response

to the research question, the meta-narrative reveals why participants attached to Down East:
                                                                                                 33
Most participants nurtured the connection through family ties that bind (Theme 1), and

through immersed in a community woven together (Theme 3), and the location where nature

speaks of belonging not seen elsewhere (Theme 4), they felt the pride in their people,

language, and traditions (Theme 2). Their enjoyment of the natural beauty (Theme 4) was

furthered by the practice of livelihoods (e.g., fishing and seafood industries) shaped by the

sea (Theme 5). All of these factors converge in the highest-order expression of attachment:

‘We don’t like unsustainable change’ (Theme 6), which is demonstrated in actions (e.g.,

social groups, Coastal Federation) to preserve Down East’s cultural, community and natural

identity. This resistance is not solely oppositional but emerges as an assertion of belonging,

an act of safeguarding the interwoven relationships between people, land, and water.

      In this stage we created a thematic map, a type of data display and analysis (see Miles

et al., 2013; Braun and Clarke, 2022) to assist in visualizing themes’ relationship. We asked

ChatGPT to help draw a flowchart. This flowchart should represent the themes’ relationships

and can be exported to MermaidChart, a free online diagram creation tool.

       Prompt 5.3: Please develop a flowchart using mermaidchart syntax to represent the

       following thematic map: The meta‐narrative explaining why participants connect to

       down east is as follows: participants nurture their connection through family ties that

       bind (theme 1), a community woven together (theme 3), and a location where nature

       speaks of belonging (theme 4); these lead to pride in our people, language, and

       traditions (theme 2). additionally, natural beauty (theme 4) is enhanced by livelihoods

       shaped by the sea (theme 5). ultimately, all themes converge into ‘we don’t like

       unsustainable change’ (theme 6).

       The flowchart should include exactly six boxes with these relationships:
                                                                                             34
          theme 1 + theme 3 + theme 4 → theme 2

          theme 2 → theme 6

          theme 4 → theme 5 → theme 6.

In MermaidChart.com, we adjusted, edited, and colored the thematic map and then exported
it in png file (Fig. 4).




               Fig. 4. The thematic map by ChatGPT and Mermaidchart.com



Stage 6. Writing-Up

In this stage, we focused on turning the above TA into an academic outputs (for instance, the

current research article). This phase involved writing interpretative narratives that connected

all the themes in answer the research question: “How do these people connect to Down

East?”.
                                                                                           35
4     Discussion and Implications for What is Next

4.1 Positioning NITA as an innovative method in the thematic analysis family

In this paper, we have presented NITA approach, a non-coding approach to TA. By following

six stages of this approach, we were able to generate themes without coding. Figure 5

compares NITA analysis process with other popular TA approaches including two-cycle

coding approach (Saldaña 2013, 2016), Template Analysis (Brooks and King, 2014; King et

al., 2018), Framework Method Analysis (Gale et al., 2013), Reflexive Thematic Analysis

(Braun & Clarke, 2022), Guided AI Thematic Analysis (GAITA) (Nguyen-Trung, 2024a),

Query-Based Approach (Morgan, 2025). NITA approach is unique with the designated first

two stages devoted to working with GenAI technologies. These unique stages involve

planning a reflexive procedure (PERFECT) to work with GenAI and preparing the GenAI

system (e.g., custom GPT, fine-tuning) and dataset (e.g., uploading documents).

Familiarizing with the dataset is crucial part of the second stage. Compared to QBA (Morgan,

2025), although having no familiarization as part of the three-step process, Morgan did imply

the need of having getting familiar with the data as a crucial before the process.
                                                                                                36




             Fig. 5. NITA approach in comparison with other TA approaches

In the current popular TA approaches (Fig. 5), as a next step after familiarizing with the data,

coding plays a crucial role in leading to the abstraction and condensation of data into

categories (or meta-codes), and generating patterns of shared meanings or themes.

       Two-cycle approach. Saldaña (2013, 2016) considers two coding cycles, with cycle 1

working directly with the data while cycle 2 focusing on developing patterns and themes

based on initial codes.

       Template Analysis. King et al. (2018) consider preliminary coding as a foundational

step before clustering (hierarchically organising codes into groups), developing initial

templates (i.e., a list of initial codes), modifying the template, and defining the final template.
                                                                                            37
       Framework Analysis: Based on Ritchie and Spencer (2003), Gale et al. (2013)

consider coding as a crucial step to develop an analytical framework (a structured

organisation of codes into categories).

       Reflexive Thematic Analysis. Based on their classic paper (2006), in the renamed

approach, Braun and Clarke (2022) consider coding as a foundational stage that helps

generate themes.

       Guided AI Thematic Analysis (GAITA). Based on King (2004) and King et al. (2018),

Nguyen-Trung (2024a) develops a procedure to work with GenAI in generating themes.

Coding is a foundational stage in helping developing templates and themes.

       Query-Based Approach (QBA). Different from current approaches, Morgan (2025)

proposes a three-step process based on iterative conversations with AI that omits coding and

goes directly into generating candidate themes, then revises and refines themes through

examining further queries and supporting data.

       Narrative-Integrated Thematic Analysis (NITA). Our approach shares the similarity

with Morgan’s QBA in that it is based on chatting with GenAI to explore themes directly

from the dataset, skipping the coding and (categorisation). The difference is that our approach

focuses on using GenAI in maintaining a reflexive space (the PERFECT procedure) for

monitoring, evaluation, and learning. From Stage 3 to Stage 5, we incorporate three steps in

Morgan’s model, namely, combining asking unstructured, broad question, following up with

further queries, and asking for supporting data. Our emphasis does not just include exploring

other quotations in the data (QBA’s step 3) but also allow exploring within case and

comparing across cases.
                                                                                              38
       In the three key stages (Stages 3, 4, 5), our approach inherits several elements of other

thematic analysis approaches.

       Generating candidate themes. In this stage, we generate potential themes with the

support of GenAI. Similar to Braun and Clarke (2022), themes here are considered

provisional and need to be reviewed, revised throughout the analysis process. In the end of

this stage, a list of candidate themes, somewhat similar to the formation of

analytical/thematic framework in Framework Analysis (Ritchie & Spencer, 1994; Gale et al.

2013) or initial templates in Template Analysis (King et al.,, 2018) but our list of themes is

not yet organized into a structured or hierarchical order. The other obvious difference is

theme generation in our approach is not based on coding.

       Constructing individual narratives. In this stage, following the advice of Maxwell and

Chmiel (2014), we focus on connecting the themes (at the abstract level) with individuals’

stories (at the concrete level). In their Framework Analysis, Gale et al. (2013) applying the

framework to index data in the remaining individual transcripts. In our approach, instead of

indexing, we focus on interepreting individuals’ stories based on the candidate themes.

Throughout this process, candidate themes can be revised further. In this regards, our stage is

similar to Braun & Clarke’s (2022) Phase 4 (developing and reviewing themes).

       Constructing meta narratives. In this stage, we focus on working across individuals

(cases) to construct a meta narrative that connects themes together. In this regards, this stage

works in a similar way to charting data into the framework matrix in Framework Analysis

(Gale et al. 2013) or cross-case matrix analysis (Miles & Huberman, 1994). However, our

focus is to create shared, cross-case narratives, rather than developing matrixes.
                                                                                         39
       Meaning of themes. Our framework considers themes as one of the final outputs of the

analysis process (as in Gale et al. 2013 and Braun and Clarke 2022). Although we develop

themes early using GenAI, these themes remain provisional and subjective to changes by

constructing individual and meta narratives. Additionally, ‘theme’ is considered more as

patterns of shared meanings instead of a topic summary. This is demonstrated in the way we

approached to naming themes that combines participants’ language, patterns of meaning, and

abstraction.

       In sum, despite presenting our NITA approach in six stages, we never have the

intention of making them prescriptive. The application of NITA must be flexibly based on

factors such as the research needs, the research team, espistemological and methodological

assumptions, the research approach, AI technology, the availabilities of resources, and so

forth. Each research team needs to discuss and decide on which procedure that works best for

them. The reflexivity and iterative nature are at the core of NITA approach that allows

researchers to deal with surprises and possible interpretations emerging during the analysis

process. As seen in Table 2, our initial PERFECT procedure functioned as a brainstorming

tool, while Appendix 1 contains the complete PERFECT procedure of the NITA approach

that was resulted from a thematic analysis process that emcompassed thorough discussion,

carefully experimenting with AI, and critical reflection.

4.2 What is next for qualitative data analysis in the GenAI era

Compared to our previous work relying extensively on coding with AI (Nguyen-Trung,

2024a), our study relied on a non-coding approach (NITA). In applying this procedure, GPT-

4o could produce lists of themes that mostly resemble the list we previously produced after
                                                                                                 40
an intensive coding process. In this regard, we have arrived at the similar conclusion in that

GenAI has demonstrated a great strength in directly generate themes without the need of

coding (Morgan, 2025, Hayes, 2025). This finding further confirms the potential of GenAI in

transforming qualitative data analysis or even facilitating a paradigm shift in Thomas Kuhn’s

sense (Friese, 2025). Does this mean GenAI can replace researchers in qualitative data

analysis?

       We believe not. The reason is that GenAI is still subject to hullucinations (Morgan,

2023, Lakshmanan 2022), due to the cultural biases embeded in their data resources, data

processing, model development (Liu, 2024, Nazer et al., 2023). Researchers must be

responsible for the knowledge they produce through maintaining a reflexive stance (Watt,

2007; Johnson & Paulus, 2024). In other words, although generating themes without coding

is possible, there needs a way to reflexively monitor, evaluate, document, validate outputs

produced by GenAI and learn about answering the research questions. Applying debiasing

techniques such as designing prompts so that it stimulates GenAI to take into account

different marginalised groups’ perspective when it comes to data analysis is a relevant

method (Hayes, 2025, p. 16). In our NITA approach, the design of prompts goes beyond just

sponteneous prompting within each chat context. This reflexive approach is more

comprehensive since it involves the planning and concretization of our research questions

into research objectives (purpose), then imagine specific steps to achieve the goals (envision)

and design expected outputs from GenAI (realize) that can include asking GenAI to look

from different perspectives. Stage 4 assists with exploration at the individual levels while

Stage 5 allows for the comparison across cases. The differences uncovered in these stages can

help validate GenAI-generated outputs.
                                                                                              41
      In short, it is important to maintain human researchers at the centre of the analysis

approach. In developing his Query-Based Approach, Morgan (2025) argues that we should

keep “a human in the loop by consistently relying on the researcher’s subjective judgments,

rather than attempting a complete mechanization of the analysis process” (Morgan, 2025, p.

23). In the end, we as qualitative researchers are the one who need to learn about the case

under study, then eventually take the ‘representational responsibility’ (Saldaña, 2018) to

defend the values of the participants we researched. In our NITA approach, purposively

developing and maintaining a reflexive, iterative space via a PERFECT procedure help keep

researchers at the centre throughout the process.
                                                                                                    42
Ethical Statements and Declarations

Funding: The authors did not receive support from any organisation for the preparation of the

manuscript or the research conducted herein.

Competing Interests: The author has no relevant financial or non-financial interests to disclose.

Ethical statement: This study only used secondary data from the project Environmental in Down East

includes 11 short interviews conducted in 2008-2009 with the permission by Lumivero (2020).

Declaration of generative AI and AI-assisted technologies in the writing process: During the

preparation of this work the author used ChatGPT in order to support the thematic analysis. Key

prompts and results are presented in the paper. The authors also used ChatGPT to check for

grammatical and spelling errors with the prompt “Proofread this part, focusing on grammatical and

spelling errors. Bold the words you changed”. After using this tool, the author reviewed and edited the

content as needed and takes full responsibility for the content of the published article.




References


Boyatzis, R. E. (1998). Transforming qualitative information: Thematic analysis and code
     development. Sage.

Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2006). Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative Research
     in Psychology, 3(2), 77–101.

Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2022). Conceptual and design thinking for thematic analysis.
     Qualitative Psychology, 9(1), 3–26. https://doi.org/10.1037/qup0000196

Brooks, J, and King, N. (2014) Doing Template Analysis: Evaluating an End of Life Care
     Service. Sage Research Methods Cases

Campbell, L. M., & Meletis, Z. A. (2011). Agreement on water and a watered‐down
    agreement: The political ecology of contested coastal development in Down East,
    North Carolina. Journal of Rural Studies, 27(3), 308–321.

Charmaz, K. (2006). Constructing grounded theory. Sage.
                                                                                        43
Chew, R., Bollenbacher, J., Wenger, M., Speer, J., & Kim, A. (2023). LLM‐assisted content
    analysis: Using large language models to support deductive coding (No.
    arXiv:2306.14924). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2306.14924

Curry, N., Baker, P., & Brookes, G. (2024). Generative AI for corpus approaches to discourse
     studies: A critical evaluation of ChatGPT. Applied Corpus Linguistics, 4(1), 100082.
     https://doi.org/10.1016/j.acorp.2023.100082

De Paoli, S. (2023). Performing an inductive thematic analysis of semi‐structured interviews
     with a large language model: An exploration and provocation on the limits of the
     approach. Social Science Computer Review, 0(0).
     https://doi.org/10.1177/08944393231220483

De Paoli, S. (2024). Further explorations on the use of large language models. Open‐ended
     prompts, better terminologies and thematic maps. Forum: Qualitative Social Research,
     25(3).

Denzin, N. K. (1989). Interpretative interactionism: Norman K. Denzin. Sage.

Drápal, J., Westermann, H., & Savelka, J. (2023). Using large language models to support
     thematic analysis in empirical legal studies (No. arXiv:2310.18729). arXiv.
     https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2310.18729

Fereday, J., & Muir‐Cochrane, E. (2006). Demonstrating rigor using thematic analysis: A
     hybrid approach of inductive and deductive coding and theme development.
     International Journal of Qualitative Methods, 5(1), 80–92.

Fan, Y., Jiang, F., Li, P., & Li, H. (2023). Uncovering the potential of ChatGPT for discourse
      analysis in dialogue: An empirical study. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.08391.

Friese, S. (2025). Generative AI: A catalyst for paradigmatic change in qualitative data
      analysis. In C. A. Prokopis (Ed.), Artificial intelligence (AI) in social research (Chapter
      7). CAB International, Wallingford, UK. Forthcoming.

Freeman, R. E. (2016). [Full reference details not provided; please verify the source if this
     work relates to qualitative research thinking.]

Gale, N. K., Heath, G., Cameron, E., Rashid, S., & Redwood, S. (2013). Using the
      framework method for the analysis of qualitative data in multi‐disciplinary health
      research. BMC Medical Research Methodology, 13, 117. https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-
      2288-13-117

Glaser, B. G., & Strauss, A. L. (1967). The discovery of grounded theory: Strategies for
     qualitative research. Aldine.
                                                                                            44
Guest, G., MacQueen, K. M., & Namey, E. E. (2012). Applied thematic analysis. Sage.

Hayes, A. S. (2025). “Conversing” with qualitative data: Enhancing qualitative research
     through large language models (LLMs). International Journal of Qualitative Methods,
     24, 16094069251322346. https://doi.org/10.1177/16094069251322346

Hitch, D. (2023). Artificial intelligence (AI) augmented qualitative analysis: The way of the
      future? SSRN. https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=4451740

Johnson, C., & Paulus, T. (2024). Generating a Reflexive AI-Assisted Workflow for
     Academic Writing. The Qualitative Report. https://doi.org/10.46743/2160-
     3715/2024.7634

Kidder, L. H., & Fine, M. (1987). Qualitative and quantitative methods: When stories
     converge. New directions for program evaluation, 1987(35), 57-75.

King, N. (2004). Using Templates in the Thematic Analysis of Text. In C. Cassell & G.
     Symon, Essential Guide to Qualitative Methods in Organizational Research (pp. 256–
     270). SAGE Publications Ltd. https://doi.org/10.4135/9781446280119.n21

King, N., Brooks, J., & Tabari, S. (2018). Template analysis in business and management
     research. In M. Ciesielska & D. Jemielniak (Eds.), Qualitative methodologies in
     organization studies (pp. 179–206). Springer International Publishing.
     https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-65442-3_8

Kong, A., Zhao, S., Chen, H., Li, Q., Qin, Y., Sun, R., … & Dong, X. (2023). Better zero-
     shot reasoning with role-play prompting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.07702.

Kuckartz, A. M., & Kuckartz, U. (2002). Qualitative text analysis with MAXQDA. Retrieved
    from https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/two-case-studies-applying-generative-ai-
    qualitative-data-friese/

Lee, R. M., & Fielding, N. G. (1991). Computing for qualitative research: Options, problems
      and potential. In N. G. Fielding & R. M. Lee (Eds.), Using computers in qualitative
      research (pp. 1–13). Sage.

Liu, Z. (2024). Cultural bias in large language models: A comprehensive analysis and
      mitigation strategies. Journal of Transcultural Communication.
      https://doi.org/10.1515/jtc-2023-0019

Lakshmanan, L. (2022). Why large language models like ChatGPT are bullshit artists, and
     how to use them effectively anyway. LinkedIn.
     https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/whylarge-language-models-like-chatgpt-bullshit-how-
     uselakshmanan/?trk=pulse-article_more-articles_relatedcontent-card
                                                                                        45
Lumivero. (2023). Multi-method: Environmental change in Down East [dataset]. https://help-
    nv.qsrinternational.com/20/win/Content/about-nvivo/explore-sample-
    project.htm?Highlight=sample%20project

Maxwell, J. A., & Chmiel, M. (2014). Notes toward a theory of qualitative data analysis. In
    U. Flick (Ed.), The SAGE handbook of qualitative data analysis (pp. 21–34). Sage.

Miles, M. B., & Huberman, A. M. (1994). Qualitative data analysis: An expanded
     sourcebook. Sage.       (Also consider Miles, M. B., Huberman, A. M., & Saldaña, J.
     (2014). Qualitative data analysis: A methods sourcebook [4th ed.] if your citation refers
     to a later edition.)

Morgan, D. L. (2007). Paradigms lost and pragmatism regained: Methodological implications
    of combining qualitative and quantitative methods. J Mix Methods Res, 1(1), 48–76.

Morgan, D. L. (2023). Exploring the use of artificial intelligence for qualitative data analysis:
    The case of ChatGPT. International Journal of Qualitative Methods, 22,
    16094069231211248. https://doi.org/10.1177/16094069231211248

Morgan, D. (2025, forthcoming). Query-based analysis: A strategy for analyzing qualitative
    data using ChatGPT. Qualitative Health Research.

Nguyen-Trung, K. (2024a). ChatGPT in Thematic Analysis: Can AI become a research
    assistant in qualitative research? https://doi.org/10.31219/osf.io/vefwc_v2

Nguyen-Trung, K. (2024b). Narrative-Integrated Thematic Analysis. Custom GPT based on
    OpenAI platform. Access from https://chatgpt.com/g/g-slzG5w8l0-narrrative-
    integrated-thematic-analysis

Nazer, L. H., Zatarah, R., Waldrip, S., Ke, J. X. C., Moukheiber, M., Khanna, A. K., Hicklen,
     R. S., Moukheiber, L., Moukheiber, D., Ma, H., & Mathur, P. (2023). Bias in artificial
     intelligence algorithms and recommendations for mitigation. PLOS Digital Health,
     2(6), e0000278. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pdig.0000278

Paulus, T. M. (2023). Using Qualitative Data Analysis Software to Support Digital Research
     Workflows. Hum Resour Dev Rev, 22(1), 139–
     148. https://doi.org/10.1177/15344843221138381

Saldaña, J. (2013). The coding manual for qualitative researchers (2nd ed.). Sage.
     (Ensure this matches the in‐text citation that includes p.2.)

Saldaña, J. (2016). The coding manual for qualitative researchers (3rd ed.). Sage.

Saldaña, J. (2018). Researcher, analyze thyself. International Journal of Qualitative Methods,
     17(1), 1609406918801717.
                                                                                             46
Shulman, S. (2011). DiscoverText: Software training to unlock the power of text.
     Proceedings of the 12th Annual International Digital Government Research
     Conference: Digital Government Innovation in Challenging Times, 373–
     373. https://doi.org/10.1145/2037556.2037632

Silver, C. (2019). Software reviews: DiscoverText. CAQDAS Networking
      Project. https://www.surrey.ac.uk/sites/default/files/2019-12/discovertext-
      distinguishing-features.pdf

Sinha, R., Solola, I., Nguyen, H., Swanson, H., & Lawrence, L. (2024). The role of
     generative AI in qualitative research: GPT-4’s contributions to a grounded theory
     analysis. In Proceedings of the Symposium on Learning, Design and Technology (pp.
     17–25). https://doi.org/10.1145/3663433.3663456

Smith, J. A. (2009). Interpretative phenomenological analysis: Theory, method and research.
     Sage.

Strauss, A. L. (1987). Qualitative analysis for social scientists. Cambridge University Press.

Strauss, A. L., & Corbin, J. (1991). Basics of qualitative research: Grounded theory
      procedures and techniques (2nd ed.). Sage.

Terry, G., Hayfield, N., Clarke, V., & Braun, V. (2017). Thematic Analysis. In The SAGE
      Handbook of Qualitative Research in Psychology (pp. 17–36). SAGE Publications Ltd.
      https://doi.org/10.4135/9781526405555

Turobov, A., Coyle, D., & Harding, V. (2024). Using ChatGPT for thematic analysis
     (arXiv:2405.08828). arXiv. http://arxiv.org/abs/2405.08828

Wachinger, J., Bärnighausen, K., Schäfer, L. N., Scott, K., & McMahon, S. A. (2024).
    Prompts, pearls, imperfections: Comparing ChatGPT and a human researcher in
    qualitative data analysis. Qualitative Health Research, 10497323241244669.
    https://doi.org/10.1177/10497323241244669

Watt, D. (2007). On becoming a qualitative researcher: The value of reflexivity. The
      Qualitative Report, 12(1), 82–101. https:// doi.org/10.46743/2160-3715/2007.1645

Woods, M., & Wickham, M. (2006). Methodological implications of software use: An
    empirical investigation of the impact of software programs on literature analysis using
    n6 and n vivo 7. In Quality and Impact of Qualitative Research (Ruth, A. (ed), pp. 163-
    172.). 3rd annual QualIT Conference, Brisbane: Institute for Integrated and Intelligent
    Systems, Griffith University.

Yin, R. K. (2014). Case study research: Design and methods (5th ed.). Thousand Oaks: Sage.
                                                                                          47


Appendix 1: Process of Narrative-Integrated Thematic Analysis


Stages             Description                  Activities


Stage 1: Planning Purposefully plan the         Focus on three elements in PERFECT

the Initial        initial PERFECT              procedure:

PERFECT            procedure to guide GenAI- 1.1 Identifying research objectives

Procedure          supported qualitative        (purpose)

                   analysis, linking research   1.2 Envisioning stages/steps to achive

                   questions with AI tasks      objectives (envision)

                   and expected outputs.        1.3 Identifying expected outputs for AI

                                                (realize)


Stage 2: Preparing Familiarize with the data,   2.1. Familiarizing with the dataset

data and the AI    prepare the dataset, and

system             configure a customized
                                                2.2. Preparing the dataset
                   GenAI system, including

                   training the AI model to     2.3. Preparing the AI system

                   support thematic analysis

                   effectively.
                                                                                             48
Stage 3:           Generate lists of candidate 3.1. Generate candidate themes with AI

Generating         themes, discuss, and use     using the same prompt on at least 3

candidate themes   one unified list for guiding different occasions

                   analysis.
                                                3.1.1. Expand original quotations to

                                                enhance the richness and nuance of the

                                                theme


                                                3.2. Compare the list of different themes

                                                generated on diffefent occasations.


                                                3.3. Discuss and agree on an initial thematic

                                                framework


Stage 4:           Apply the candidate          4.1. Construct an individual narrative for

Constructing       themes to interpret and      each Transcript

individual         construct personal stories
                                                4.2. Identify Missing Themes in Individual
narratives         for each participant,
                                                Narratives
                   maintaining real-world

                   relationships (contiguity)

                   and continuously refining

                   themes through reflexive

                   iteration.
                                                                                          49
Stage 5:           Apply the refined themes     5.1. Constructing Cross-Case Comparison

Constructing meta construct patterns across

narratives         groups (e.g., age, gender)   5.2. Discuss on naming themes

                   to form meta-narratives,

                   highlighting both shared     5.3. Create a meta-narrative

                   experiences and divergent

                   perspectives.


Stage 6: Writing   Synthesize the constructed 6. Write up the interpretative narrative

up                 narratives, integrating

                   thematic insights to

                   address the research

                   questions through

                   coherent, reflexive

                   reporting.
                                                                               50
Appendix 2: ROLE framework for responding to the question “Anything else ChatGPT

should know about you?”


Categories Component            Description               Example


Role and    Role & field        Your professional role    I am a qualitative researcher

Research                        and working field         and consultant in sociology of

Fields                                                    disaster, water resilience, and

                                                          social inclusion.


            Tasks               Tasks you often do that   I use qualitative research

                                most relevant to AI use   approaches (e.g., thematic

                                                          analysis) to analyse data

                                                          sources such as documents,

                                                          interviews, texts, images, and

                                                          videos. I translate data between

                                                          English and Vietnamese.


            Locations/Countries Locations/countries you   I often work with communities

                                often work with.          in Australia and Southeast

                                                          Asia.


Objective   Main Goal           The main goal of your     My aim is to produce high-

                                work.                     quality research outputs,

                                                          including peer-reviewed
                                                                                 51
                                                   articles and books, and support

                                                   decision-making for

                                                   government and industry

                                                   partners.


          Impact         The impact you aim to     I strive to influence disaster

                         achieve with your         management policies and

                         research.                 contribute to theoretical

                                                   advancements in sociology.


          End Users      The target groups or end My target groups include

                         users of your research.   journal editors, government

                                                   officials, and water managers.


Lexicon   Key Concepts   Key concepts used in      My research involves concepts

                         your research.            such as community resilience,

                                                   disaster response, social

                                                   inclusion, and qualitative

                                                   methods like thematic analysis

                                                   and grounded theory.


          Language       Language style            I use British English, often

                                                   moving between formal and
                                                                                         52
                                                         neutral language, and

                                                         Vietnamese.


Ethics   Confidentiality      How you ensure             I respect the confidentiality of

                              confidentiality of your    research participants, their

                              research participants.     information, profiles, and

                                                         contexts.


         Data Security        Measures you take to       I implement robust data

                              ensure data security and   security measures to protect

                              privacy.                   participant information and

                                                         project details.


         Cultural Sensitivity Practices you follow to    I work with Traditional Owners

                              ensure cultural sensitivity in Australia and people from

                              and inclusivity in your    Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia, and

                              research.                  Thailand.
                                                                                             53
Appendix 3. GUIDE framework in responding to the question “What traits should

ChatGPT have?”


Components     Components        Description              Examples


Guidelines     Specific          Commitment to            Your responses should reflect a

               academic          academic rigour and      strict commitment to academic

               guidelines        adherence to ethical     rigour, particularly for peer-

                                 guidelines in            reviewed journals, and adhere to

                                 responses.               ethical guidelines, especially

                                                          those relevant to sociology and

                                                          qualitative research.


               Confidentiality   How AI should ensure You must respect the

                                 the confidentiality of   confidentiality of research

                                 your research            participants, their information,

                                 participants.            profiles, and contexts.


               Data Security     How AI should ensure You must implement robust data

                                 data security and        security measures to protect

                                 privacy, especially      participant information and

                                 people and project       project details.

                                 data
                                                                                         54
              Cultural         Practices you follow    You must respect Traditional

              Sensitivity      to ensure cultural      Owners in Australia

                               sensitivity and

                               inclusivity in your

                               research.


Understanding Understanding    Providing key           You need to associate with the

              the field        understandings of the fields of sociology of disasters,

                               fields we work on.      qualitative research, and

                                                       community-based research

                                                       including key concepts like

                                                       disaster, thematic analysis, code,

                                                       cluster, and theme.


Integrity     Adhere to data   Key guidelines in       Do not fabricate data or generate

              integrity in     ensuring data integrity findings not explicitly derived

              responses                                from the materials I provide.


Document      References to    Providing references    Referencing existing scholarly

Referencing   academic         to existing scholarly   literature for theoretical and

              documents        literature for          evidence support is encouraged.

                               theoretical and         Where possible, provide links to

                               evidence support.       the claims.
                                                                                           55
Expression     Language        Using specified        All responses must be in formal

                               language and style     academic or neutral Australian

                               preferences for        English, adhering to specific

                               responses.             spelling, grammar, and stylistic

                                                      conventions.


               Translating     What to adhere when When translating, you need to

                               when translating       strictly follow the tone, voice,

                                                      and style in the input language.


               Making changes What to adhere when When editing, if you change any

                               when making changes words, please make the changed

                                                      words bold, and provide me with

                                                      a note of why you changed them

                                                      at the end.


               Preamble        What to adhere when When responding, please skip the

                               providing responses    preamble, and do not capitalise

                                                      the letters except they are at the

                                                      start of the sentence.


Suggestions    Creativity      Setting how AI should Your creative suggestions and

and Opinions                   be creative or strictly opinions are encouraged but

                               follow                 should always be well-grounded
                                   56
in data analysis and scholarly

discourse related to my research

areas.
